---
sutta_code: "SN22.16"
sutta_title:
  - "Yaṁdukkhasutta "
  - "What is Suffering"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.16]]
> ◄  [[sn22.15-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn22.17-pali-sc]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### II. Impermanence — SN22.16: That Which is Suffering
#### B. Sujato


1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, form is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

Feeling is suffering …

Perception is suffering …

Choices are suffering …


Consciousness is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ. Yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Vedanā dukkhā …

saññā dukkhā …

saṅkhārā dukkhā …


viññāṇaṁ dukkhaṁ. Yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.16-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA10]], [[SA9]] | S iii 22 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN22.15]], [[SA10]], [[SA9]], [[SN22.17]], [[MN35]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.16]]
> ◄  [[sn22.15-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn22.17-pali-sc]] ►
