---
sutta_code: "SN22.19"
sutta_title:
  - "Sahetudukkhasutta "
  - "Suffering with Cause"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.19]]
> ◄  [[sn22.18-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn22.20-pali-sc]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### II. Impermanence — SN22.19: Suffering With Its Cause
#### B. Sujato


1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, form is suffering. The cause and condition that gives rise to form is also suffering. Since form is produced by what is suffering, how could it be happiness?

Feeling is suffering …

Perception is suffering …

Choices are suffering …


Consciousness is suffering. The cause and condition that gives rise to consciousness is also suffering. Since consciousness is produced by what is suffering, how could it be happiness?

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo rūpassa uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ kuto sukhaṁ bhavissati.

Vedanā dukkhā …

saññā dukkhā …

saṅkhārā dukkhā …


viññāṇaṁ dukkhaṁ. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo viññāṇassa uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṁ kuto sukhaṁ bhavissati.

Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA11]], [[SA12]] | S iii 23 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA12]], [[SA11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.19]]
> ◄  [[sn22.18-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn22.20-pali-sc]] ►
