---
sutta_code: "SN22.20"
sutta_title:
  - "Sahetuanattasutta "
  - "Nonself with Cause"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.20]]
> ◄  [[sn22.19-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn22.21-pali-sc]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### II. Impermanence — SN22.20: Not-Self With Its Cause
#### B. Sujato


1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, form is not-self. The cause and condition that gives rise to form is also not-self. Since form is produced by what is not-self, how could it be self?

Feeling is not-self …

Perception is not-self …

Choices are not-self …


Consciousness is not-self. The cause and condition that gives rise to consciousness is also not-self. Since consciousness is produced by what is not-self, how could it be self?

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, anattā. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo rūpassa uppādāya, sopi anattā. Anattasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ kuto attā bhavissati.

Vedanā anattā …

saññā anattā …

saṅkhārā anattā …


viññāṇaṁ anattā. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo viññāṇassa uppādāya, sopi anattā. Anattasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṁ kuto attā bhavissati.

Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.20-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA11]], [[SA12]] | S iii 24 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA12]], [[SA11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.20]]
> ◄  [[sn22.19-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn22.21-pali-sc]] ►
