---
sutta_code: "SN26.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Cakkhusutta "
  - "The Eye"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN26]]  / 🌐 [[SN26.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn26.2-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 26. Uppādasaṁyutta: On Arising

### I. Arising — SN26.1: The Eye
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the eye is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death.

The cessation, settling, and ending of the eye is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending of the ear, nose, body, and mind is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Yo kho, bhikkhave, cakkhussa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. Yo sotassa uppādo ṭhiti … pe … yo ghānassa uppādo ṭhiti … yo jivhāya uppādo ṭhiti … yo kāyassa uppādo ṭhiti … yo manassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo.

Yo ca, bhikkhave, cakkhussa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. Yo sotassa nirodho … pe … yo ghānassa nirodho … yo jivhāya nirodho … yo kāyassa nirodho … yo manassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn26.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA315]] | S iii 228 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA315]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN26]]  / 🌐 [[SN26.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn26.2-sujato-pali]] ►
