---
sutta_code: "SN26.10"
sutta_title:
  - "Khandhasutta "
  - "Aggregates"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN26]]  / 🌐 [[SN26.10]]
> ◄  [[sn26.9-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

`

## 26. Uppādasaṁyutta: On Arising

### I. Arising — SN26.10: The Aggregates
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of form is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death.

The cessation, settling, and ending of form is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending of feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Yo kho, bhikkhave, rūpassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. Yo vedanāya … yo saññāya … yo saṅkhārānaṁ … yo viññāṇassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo.

Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. Yo vedanāya … yo saññāya … yo saṅkhārānaṁ … yo viññāṇassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Uppāda vaggo paṭhamo.

2Cakkhu rūpañca viññāṇaṁ,  
phasso ca vedanāya ca;  
Saññā ca cetanā taṇhā,  
dhātu khandhena te dasāti.

Up pāda saṁyuttaṁ samattaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn26.10-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA899]] | S iii 231 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA899]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN26]]  / 🌐 [[SN26.10]]
> ◄  [[sn26.9-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
