---
sutta_code: "SN26.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Rūpasutta "
  - "Sightss"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN26]]  / 🌐 [[SN26.2]]
> ◄  [[sn26.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn26.3-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

`

## 26. Uppādasaṁyutta: On Arising

### I. Arising — SN26.2: Sights
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of sights is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death.

The cessation, settling, and ending of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Yo kho, bhikkhave, rūpānaṁ uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. Yo saddānaṁ … yo gandhānaṁ … yo rasānaṁ … yo phoṭṭhabbānaṁ … yo dhammānaṁ uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo.

Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpānaṁ nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. Yo saddānaṁ … yo gandhānaṁ … yo rasānaṁ … yo phoṭṭhabbānaṁ … yo dhammānaṁ nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn26.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA899]] | S iii 229 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA899]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN26]]  / 🌐 [[SN26.2]]
> ◄  [[sn26.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn26.3-sujato-pali]] ►
