---
vin_code: "BU-NP23"
vin_title: "Bhesajja - Tonics Five"
sutta-version: "Deepseek"
language: "Pali - English"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Patimokkha.base#patimokkha-catalogue|Vin Catalogue]] I 📒 [[BU]] / 📂 [[BU-NP]] I 🌐 [[BU-NP23]]
> ◄  [[bu-np22-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[bu-np24-deepseek-pali]] ►

# BU-NP 23

## 3. Bhesajjasikkhāpadaṃ

## 3.The Training Rule Concerning Medicine.

618. [idaṃ vatthu mahāva. 270] Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā pilindavaccho rājagahe pabbhāraṃ sodhāpeti leṇaṃ kattukāmo. Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro yenāyasmā pilindavaccho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ pilindavacchaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro āyasmantaṃ pilindavacchaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘kiṃ, bhante, thero kārāpetī’’ti? ‘‘Pabbhāraṃ mahārāja, sodhāpemi leṇaṃ kattukāmo’’ti. ‘‘Attho, bhante, ayyassa ārāmikenā’’ti? ‘‘Na kho, mahārāja, bhagavatā ārāmiko anuññāto’’ti. ‘‘Tena hi, bhante, bhagavantaṃ paṭipucchitvā mama āroceyyāthā’’ti. ‘‘Evaṃ mahārājā’’ti kho āyasmā pilindavaccho rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa paccassosi. Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho rājānaṃ māgadhaṃ seniyaṃ bimbisāraṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṃsesi. Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro āyasmatā pilindavacchena dhammiyā kathāya sandassito samādapito samuttejito sampahaṃsito uṭṭhāyāsanā āyasmantaṃ pilindavacchaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi.

618.At that time, the Blessed One was staying at Sāvatthī in Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. At that time, Venerable Pilindavaccha was having a rock-shelter cleared in Rājagaha, intending to build a dwelling. Then King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha approached Venerable Pilindavaccha, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha said to Venerable Pilindavaccha, “What, venerable sir, are you having done?” “Great king, I am having a rock-shelter cleared, intending to build a dwelling.” “Does the venerable need a monastery attendant?” “No, great king, the Blessed One has not allowed monastery attendants.” “Then, venerable sir, please ask the Blessed One and inform me.” “Very well, great king,” Venerable Pilindavaccha assented to King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha. Then Venerable Pilindavaccha instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha with a Dhamma talk. Then King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha, having been instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened by Venerable Pilindavaccha with a Dhamma talk, rose from his seat, paid homage to Venerable Pilindavaccha, circumambulated him, and departed.

619. Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho bhagavato santike dūtaṃ pāhesi – ‘‘rājā, bhante, māgadho seniyo bimbisāro ārāmikaṃ dātukāmo. Kathaṃ nu kho, bhante, mayā paṭipajjitabba’’nti? Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṃ nidāne etasmiṃ pakaraṇe dhammiṃ kathaṃ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘anujānāmi, bhikkhave, ārāmika’’nti. Dutiyampi kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro yenāyasmā pilindivaccho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ pilindavacchaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro āyasmantaṃ pilindavacchaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘anuññāto, bhante, bhagavatā ārāmiko’’ti? ‘‘Evaṃ, mahārājā’’ti. ‘‘Tena hi, bhante, ayyassa ārāmikaṃ dammī’’ti. Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro āyasmato pilindavacchassa ārāmikaṃ paṭissuṇitvā vissaritvā cirena satiṃ paṭilabhitvā aññataraṃ sabbatthakaṃ mahāmattaṃ āmantesi – ‘‘yo mayā, bhaṇe, ayyassa ārāmiko paṭissuto, dinno so ārāmiko’’ti? ‘‘Na kho, deva, ayyassa ārāmiko dinno’’ti. ‘‘Kīvaciraṃ nu kho, bhaṇe, ito hi taṃ hotī’’ti? Atha kho so mahāmatto rattiyo gaṇetvā [vigaṇetvā (ka.)] rājānaṃ māgadhaṃ seniyaṃ bimbisāraṃ etadavoca – ‘‘pañca, deva, rattisatānī’’ti. ‘‘Tena hi, bhaṇe, ayyassa pañca ārāmikasatāni dehī’’ti. ‘‘Evaṃ, devā’’ti kho so mahāmatto rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa paṭissuṇitvā āyasmato pilindavacchassa pañca ārāmikasatāni pādāsi [adāsi (syā.)], pāṭiyekko gāmo nivisi. Ārāmikagāmakotipi naṃ āhaṃsu, pilindagāmakotipi naṃ āhaṃsu.

619.Then Venerable Pilindavaccha sent a messenger to the Blessed One: “Lord, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha wishes to give a monastery attendant. How, Lord, should I proceed?” Then the Blessed One, on this occasion, for this reason, having given a Dhamma talk, addressed the bhikkhus: “I permit, bhikkhus, a monastery attendant.” A second time, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha approached Venerable Pilindavaccha; having approached, he paid homage to Venerable Pilindavaccha and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha said to Venerable Pilindavaccha: “Venerable sir, has the Blessed One allowed a monastery attendant?” “Yes, great king.” “Then, venerable sir, I will give a monastery attendant to the venerable one.” Then King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha, having promised a monastery attendant to Venerable Pilindavaccha, forgot and only after a long time regained his memory. He then addressed a certain general minister: “Good man, was the monastery attendant I promised to the venerable one given?” “No, sire, the monastery attendant was not given to the venerable one.” “How long ago, good man, was that?” Then that general minister counted the nights and said to King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha: “Five hundred nights, sire.” “Then, good man, give the venerable one five hundred monastery attendants.” “Yes, sire,” replied that general minister, and he gave five hundred monastery attendants to Venerable Pilindavaccha. Separate villages were established. They called it the Monastery Attendant Village, and they also called it the Pilinda Village.

620. Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā pilindavaccho tasmiṃ gāmake kulūpako hoti. Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaraṃ ādāya pilindagāmakaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. Tena kho pana samayena tasmiṃ gāmake ussavo hoti. Dārakā alaṅkatā mālākitā kīḷanti. Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho pilindagāmake sapadānaṃ piṇḍāya caramāno yena aññatarassa ārāmikassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Tena kho pana samayena tassā ārāmikiniyā dhītā aññe dārake alaṅkate mālākite passitvā rodati – ‘‘mālaṃ me detha, alaṅkāraṃ me dethā’’ti. Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho taṃ ārāmikiniṃ etadavoca – ‘‘kissāyaṃ dārikā rodatī’’ti? ‘‘Ayaṃ, bhante, dārikā aññe dārake alaṅkate mālākite passitvā rodati – ‘mālaṃ me detha, alaṅkāraṃ me dethā’ti. Kuto amhākaṃ duggatānaṃ mālā kuto, alaṅkāro’’ti? Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho aññataraṃ tiṇaṇḍupakaṃ gahetvā taṃ ārāmikiniṃ etadavoca – ‘‘handimaṃ tiṇaṇḍupakaṃ tassā dārikāya sīse paṭimuñcā’’ti. Atha kho sā ārāmikinī taṃ tiṇaṇḍupakaṃ gahetvā tassā dārikāya sīse paṭimuñci. Sā ahosi suvaṇṇamālā abhirūpā dassanīyā pāsādikā. Natthi tādisā raññopi antepure suvaṇṇamālā. Manussā rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa ārocesuṃ – ‘‘amukassa, deva, ārāmikassa ghare suvaṇṇamālā abhirūpā dassanīyā pāsādikā. Natthi tādisā devassāpi antepure suvaṇṇamālā. Kuto tassa duggatassa! Nissaṃsayaṃ corikāya ābhatā’’ti!! Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro taṃ ārāmikakulaṃ bandhāpesi. Dutiyampi kho āyasmā pilindavaccho pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaraṃ ādāya pilindagāmakaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. Pilindagāmake sapadānaṃ piṇḍāya caramāno yena tassa ārāmikassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paṭivissake pucchi – ‘‘kahaṃ imaṃ ārāmikakulaṃ gata’’nti? ‘‘Etissā, bhante, suvaṇṇamālāya kāraṇā raññā bandhāpita’’nti.

620.At that time, Venerable Pilindavaccha was a frequenter of families in that village. Then, Venerable Pilindavaccha, having dressed in the morning, took his bowl and robe and entered Pilindagāmaka for alms. At that time, there was a festival in that village. Children, adorned and garlanded, were playing. Then, Venerable Pilindavaccha, walking for alms in Pilindagāmaka in regular order, approached the dwelling of a certain monastery attendant; having approached, he sat down on the prepared seat. At that time, the daughter of that monastery attendant, seeing other children adorned and garlanded, cried: “Give me a garland! Give me ornaments!” Then, Venerable Pilindavaccha said to that monastery attendant: “Why is this girl crying?” “Venerable sir, this girl, seeing other children adorned and garlanded, cries: ‘Give me a garland! Give me ornaments!’ Where would we poor people get garlands or ornaments?” Then, Venerable Pilindavaccha took a bundle of grass and said to that monastery attendant: “Here, put this bundle of grass on the girl’s head.” Then, that monastery attendant took that bundle of grass and put it on the girl’s head. It became a golden garland, beautiful, attractive, and pleasing. There was no such golden garland even in the king’s inner palace. People informed King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha: “Sire, in the house of such-and-such a monastery attendant, there is a golden garland, beautiful, attractive, and pleasing. There is no such golden garland even in your inner palace. How could that poor man have it? Surely, it must have been obtained by theft!” Then, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha had that monastery attendant’s family arrested. A second time, Venerable Pilindavaccha, having dressed in the morning, took his bowl and robe and entered Pilindagāmaka for alms. Walking for alms in Pilindagāmaka in regular order, he approached the dwelling of that monastery attendant; having approached, he asked the neighbors: “Where has this monastery attendant’s family gone?” “Venerable sir, because of that golden garland, they have been arrested by the king.”

621. Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho yena rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Atha kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro yenāyasmā pilindavaccho tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ pilindavacchaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho rājānaṃ māgadhaṃ seniyaṃ bimbisāraṃ āyasmā pilindavaccho etadavoca – ‘‘kissa, mahārāja, ārāmikakulaṃ bandhāpita’’nti? ‘‘Tassa, bhante, ārāmikassa ghare suvaṇṇamālā abhirūpā dassanīyā pāsādikā. Natthi tādisā amhākampi antepure suvaṇṇamālā. Kuto tassa duggatassa! Nissaṃsayaṃ corikāya ābhatā’’ti!! Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa pāsādaṃ suvaṇṇanti adhimucci. So ahosi sabbasovaṇṇamayo. ‘‘Idaṃ pana te, mahārāja, tāva bahuṃ suvaṇṇaṃ kuto’’ti? ‘‘Aññātaṃ, bhante, ayyasseveso iddhānubhāvo’’ti. Taṃ ārāmikakulaṃ muñcāpesi. Manussā – ‘‘ayyena kira pilindavacchena sarājikāya parisāya uttarimanussadhammaṃ iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ dassita’’nti, attamanā abhippasannā āyasmato pilindavacchassa pañca bhesajjāni abhihariṃsu, seyyathidaṃ – sappi navanītaṃ telaṃ madhu phāṇitaṃ. Pakatiyāpi ca āyasmā pilindavaccho lābhī hoti pañcannaṃ bhesajjānaṃ. Laddhaṃ laddhaṃ parisāya vissajjeti. Parisā cassa hoti bāhullikā. Laddhaṃ laddhaṃ kolambepi ghaṭepi pūretvā paṭisāmeti, parissāvanānipi thavikāyopi pūretvā vātapānesu laggeti. Tāni olīnavilīnāni tiṭṭhanti. Undūrehipi vihārā okiṇṇavikiṇṇā honti. Manussā vihāracārikaṃ āhiṇḍantā passitvā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti – ‘‘antokoṭṭhāgārikā ime samaṇā sakyaputtiyā, seyyathāpi rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro’’ti! Assosuṃ kho bhikkhū tesaṃ manussānaṃ ujjhāyantānaṃ khiyyantānaṃ vipācentānaṃ. Ye te bhikkhū appicchā…pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti – ‘‘kathañhi nāma bhikkhū evarūpāya bāhullāya cetessantī’’ti! Atha kho te bhikkhū te anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ…pe… ‘‘saccaṃ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū evarūpāya bāhullāya cetentī’’ti? ‘‘Saccaṃ, bhagavā’’ti. Vigarahi buddho bhagavā…pe… kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā evarūpāya bāhullāya cetessanti! Netaṃ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṃ vā pasādāya…pe… evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ uddiseyyātha –

621.Then Venerable Pilindavaccha went to the residence of King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha; having approached, he sat down on the prepared seat. Then King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha approached Venerable Pilindavaccha; having approached, he paid homage to Venerable Pilindavaccha and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha was addressed by Venerable Pilindavaccha: “Great king, why have you imprisoned the monastery attendant’s family?” “Venerable sir, in that monastery attendant’s house there was a golden garland, beautiful, attractive, and pleasing. There is no such golden garland even in our inner palace, let alone for that poor man! Surely it was obtained by theft!” Then Venerable Pilindavaccha resolved that King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha’s palace be gold. It became completely golden. “But great king, where did all this gold come from?” “It is unknown, venerable sir. This is indeed the venerable one’s supernormal power.” He then released the monastery attendant’s family. People, delighted and pleased, said, “It seems that Venerable Pilindavaccha displayed a superhuman feat of psychic power in the assembly including the king!” They brought five kinds of medicine to Venerable Pilindavaccha, namely: ghee, fresh butter, oil, honey, and molasses. By nature, Venerable Pilindavaccha was accustomed to receiving the five kinds of medicine. Whatever he received, he distributed to the Saṅgha. His following was numerous. Whatever he received, he stored in large-mouthed jars and pots, filling them up. He also filled strainers and bags, hanging them in the windows. These became congealed and spoiled. Rats infested the monasteries, scattering things. People wandering around the monastery saw this and complained, criticized, and grumbled: “These Sakyan ascetics are like indoor storehouse keepers, just like King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha!” The bhikkhus heard the complaints, criticism, and grumbling of those people. Those bhikkhus who were modest… criticized and complained: “How can these bhikkhus be intent on such abundance?” Then those bhikkhus, having rebuked them in many ways, reported the matter to the Blessed One… “Is it true, bhikkhus, that those bhikkhus are intent on such abundance?” “It is true, Blessed One.” The Blessed One rebuked them… “How can you foolish men be intent on such abundance? This does not lead to the conversion of the unconverted, nor to the increase of the converted…” … “And so, bhikkhus, this training rule should be recited thus:”

622. ‘‘Yāni kho pana tāni gilānānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ paṭisāyanīyāni bhesajjāni, seyyathidaṃ – sappi navanītaṃ telaṃ madhu phāṇitaṃ, tāni paṭiggahetvā sattāhaparamaṃ sannidhikārakaṃ paribhuñjitabbāni. Taṃ atikkāmayato nissaggiyaṃ pācittiya’’nti.

622.Now, whatever medicines are suitable for sick bhikkhus—that is, ghee, fresh butter, oil, honey, and molasses—having received them, they may be kept for at most seven days for use. If one exceeds that, it entails forfeiture and confession.

623. Yāni kho pana tāni gilānānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ paṭisāyanīyāni bhessajjānīti sappi nāma gosappi vā ajikāsappi vā mahiṃsasappi [mahisasappi (sī. syā.)] vā yesaṃ maṃsaṃ kappati tesaṃ sappi. Navanītaṃ nāma tesaṃ yeva navanītaṃ. Telaṃ nāma tilatelaṃ sāsapatelaṃ madhukatelaṃ eraṇḍatelaṃ vasātelaṃ. Madhu nāma makkhikāmadhu. Phāṇitaṃ nāma ucchumhā nibbattaṃ.

623.Those medicines suitable for sick bhikkhus are: ghee—that is, cow ghee, goat ghee, or buffalo ghee, or ghee from any animal whose meat is permissible; fresh butter—that is, fresh butter from those same animals; oil—that is, sesame oil, mustard oil, madhuka oil, castor oil, or oil from animal fat; honey—that is, bee honey; and molasses—that is, what is produced from sugarcane.

Tāni paṭiggahetvā sattāhaparamaṃ sannidhikārakaṃ paribhuñjitabbānīti sattāhaparamatā paribhuñjitabbāni.

The phrase ‘having received them, they may be kept for at most seven days for use’ means that they are to be consumed for at most seven days.

Taṃ atikkāmayato nissaggiyaṃ hotīti aṭṭhame aruṇuggamane nissaggiyaṃ hoti. Nissajjitabbaṃ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā. Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṃ…pe… idaṃ me, bhante, bhesajjaṃ sattāhātikkantaṃ nissaggiyaṃ, imāhaṃ saṅghassa nissajjāmīti…pe… dadeyyāti…pe… dadeyyunti…pe… āyasmato dammīti.

The phrase ‘if one exceeds that, it entails forfeiture’ means that it becomes subject to forfeiture at dawn on the eighth day. It must be forfeited to the Sangha, to a group, or to an individual. And this is how, bhikkhus, it should be forfeited: [The bhikkhu] should say: ‘Venerable sirs, this medicine of mine has exceeded the seven-day limit and entails forfeiture. I forfeit it to the Sangha.’ [Then the Sangha, a group, or an individual should say:] ‘Give it.’ [The bhikkhu should say:] ‘I give it.’ [The Sangha, a group, or an individual should say:] ‘We give it.’ [The bhikkhu should say:] ‘I give it to the Venerable One.’

624. Sattāhātikkante atikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. Sattāhātikkante vematiko, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. Sattāhātikkante anatikkantasaññī, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. Anadhiṭṭhite adhiṭṭhitasaññī, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. Avissajjite vissajjitasaññī, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. Anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññī, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. Avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññī, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. Adaḍḍhe daḍḍhasaññī, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. Avilutte viluttasaññī, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ.

624.If, when seven days have passed, one perceives it as having passed, it entails forfeiture and confession. If, when seven days have passed, one is doubtful, it entails forfeiture and confession. If, when seven days have passed, one perceives it as not having passed, it entails forfeiture and confession. If one perceives it as assigned when it is not assigned, it entails forfeiture and confession. If one perceives it as relinquished when it is not relinquished, it entails forfeiture and confession. If one perceives it as lost when it is not lost, it entails forfeiture and confession. If one perceives it as ruined when it is not ruined, it entails forfeiture and confession. If one perceives it as burned when it is not burned, it entails forfeiture and confession. If one perceives it as plundered when it is not plundered, it entails forfeiture and confession.

Nissaṭṭhaṃ paṭilabhitvā na kāyikena paribhogena paribhuñjitabbaṃ, na ajjhoharitabbaṃ, padīpe vā kāḷavaṇṇe vā upanetabbaṃ, aññena bhikkhunā kāyikena paribhogena paribhuñjitabbaṃ, na ajjhoharitabbaṃ.

Once forfeited and recovered, it should not be used for bodily application or consumed by the original owner. It may be used for a lamp or for dyeing. Another bhikkhu may use it for bodily application but should not consume it.

Sattāhānatikkante atikkantasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Sattāhānatikkante vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Sattāhānatikkante anatikkantasaññī, anāpatti.

If, when seven days have not passed, one perceives it as having passed, it is an offense of wrong-doing. If, when seven days have not passed, one is doubtful, it is an offense of wrong-doing. If, when seven days have not passed, one perceives it as not having passed, there is no offense.

625. Anāpatti antosattāhaṃ adhiṭṭheti, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, ḍayhati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṃ gaṇhanti, anupasampannassa cattena vantena muttena anapekkho datvā paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, ummattakassa, ādikammikassāti.

625.There is no offense if one determines (to use it) within seven days; if one relinquishes it; if it is lost; if it becomes unusable; if it is burned; if others take it by force; if others take it trusting; if, having given it to an unordained person, having given it up without concern, one receives it back and makes use of it; if one is insane; or if it is one’s initial action.

Bhesajjasikkhāpadaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ tatiyaṃ.

The third training rule on medicines is concluded.


---

## 🌿 Rule Connections

> [!done] Texts and translations 
> Click for all [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:bu-np23-)
> 
>| Vibhanga | BMC1     | Ven Ñanatusita                 |
>| --------------------- | -------- | -------------------------- |
>| [[bu-np23-brahmali-pali]]          | [[bmc1#PJ1]] | [[ñanatusita-translation#NP23]] |
>|       |  [[bmc1-concise]]        | [[ñanatusita-analysis#^NP23]]    |



> [!important] ☸️ [[Patimokkha.base#patimokkha-catalogue|Vin Catalogue]] I 📒 [[BU]] / 📂 [[BU-NP]] I 🌐 [[BU-NP23]]
> ◄  [[bu-np22-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[bu-np24-deepseek-pali]] ►
