---
sutta_code: "MA164"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "分別觀法 "
  - "Analytical Contemplation of Dharmas"
nikaya:
  - "MA "
  - "Madhyama Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MA151-160"
  - ""
  - "MA 13 Basic Analysis"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Clinging"
  - "Meditation"
sutta_topic:
  - "Aggregates"
  - "Meditation instructions"
sutta_training:
  - "Paññā"
  - "Samādhi"
sutta_stage:
  - "Final"
  - "Middle"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Kaccana"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: ""
parallels_partilal: ""
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA163]]  🌐 [[MA165]] ►

# MA164 - 分別觀法 - Analytical Contemplation of Dharmas
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> The Buddha  gives a brief and enigmatic statement on the ways consciousness may become attached. Venerable mahākaccāna is invited by the bhikkhus to draw out the implications

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Consciousness is not scattered and diffused externally when doesn’t follow after the features of that any object in contact with  the 6 senses, and is not tied, attached, and fettered to gratification in its features
Don’t regard form, feelings, perceptions, fabrications or consciousness as me or mine
> 
> Consciousness is not stuck internally when they enter and remain in the 4 jhanas but doesn’t follow after that rapture, bliss, equanimity or neutral feeling, and is not tied, attached, and fettered to gratification in those l feelings
 that form of theirs decays and perishes, consciousness doesn’t latch on to the perishing of form. Anxieties don’t occupy their mind. So They don’t become frightened, worried, concerned, or anxious because of grasping
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma164-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
|  |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.192]], [[AN7.64]], [[AN8.54]], [[UD6.2]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA164%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMA164%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA164%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA164%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Ama164-%20-file%3A%22MA163%22%20-file%3A%22MA165%22%20-file%3A%22MA164%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ma164/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA163]]  🌐 [[MA165]] ►
