---
sutta_code: "SN34.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhimūlakasātaccakārīsutta "
  - "Persistence in relation to Concentration"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.9]]
> ◄  [[sn34.8-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn34.10-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 34.9 Samādhimūlakasātaccakārīsuttaṃ

## SN 34.9 The Discourse on Persistence Rooted in samādhi

670. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Cattārome, bhikkhave, jhāyī. Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo hoti, na samādhismiṃ sātaccakārī. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ sātaccakārī hoti, na samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī neva samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo hoti, na ca samādhismiṃ sātaccakārī. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo ca hoti, samādhismiṃ sātaccakārī ca. Tatra, bhikkhave, yvāyaṃ jhāyī samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo ca hoti, samādhismiṃ sātaccakārī ca ayaṃ imesaṃ catunnaṃ jhāyīnaṃ aggo ca seṭṭho ca mokkho ca uttamo ca pavaro ca. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gavā khīraṃ…pe… pavaro cā’’ti. Navamaṃ.

670.At Savatthi. "Monks, there are these four meditators. Which four? Here, monks, a certain meditator is skilled in samādhi, but is not constantly applying himself to samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is constantly applying himself to samādhi, but is not skilled in samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is neither skilled in samādhi nor constantly applying himself to samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is both skilled in samādhi and constantly applying himself to samādhi. Of these four meditators, monks, the meditator who is both skilled in samādhi and constantly applying himself to samādhi is the foremost, the best, the chief, the highest, and the most excellent. Just as, monks, from a cow comes milk... and the most excellent." The ninth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn34.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA883]] | S iii 268 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA883]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.9]]
> ◄  [[sn34.8-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn34.10-deepseek-pali]] ►
