---
sutta_code: "SN34.17"
sutta_title:
  - "Samāpattimūlakasakkaccasutta "
  - "Thoroughness in relation to Attainment"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.17]]
> ◄  [[sn34.16-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn34.18-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 34.17 Samāpattimūlakasakkaccasuttaṃ

## SN 34.17 The Discourse on Earnestness, Rooted in Attainment

678. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Cattārome, bhikkhave, jhāyī. Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ samāpattikusalo hoti, na samādhismiṃ sakkaccakārī. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ sakkaccakārī hoti, na samādhismiṃ samāpattikusalo. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī neva samādhismiṃ samāpattikusalo hoti, na ca samādhismiṃ sakkaccakārī. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ samāpattikusalo ca hoti, samādhismiṃ sakkaccakārī ca. Tatra…pe… pavaro cā’’ti. Sattarasamaṃ.

678.At Sāvatthī. “Monks, there are these four meditators. Which four? Here, monks, a certain meditator is skilled in the attainment of samādhi, but not diligent in samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is diligent in samādhi, but not skilled in the attainment of samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is neither skilled in the attainment of samādhi, nor diligent in samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is both skilled in the attainment of samādhi and diligent in samādhi. Of these… the last is the best.” The seventeenth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn34.17-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA883]] | S iii 271 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA883]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.17]]
> ◄  [[sn34.16-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn34.18-deepseek-pali]] ►
