---
sutta_code: "SN34.6"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhimūlakagocarasutta "
  - "The Range in relation to Concentration"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.6]]
> ◄  [[sn34.5-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn34.7-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 34.6 Samādhimūlakagocarasuttaṃ

## SN 34.6 The Discourse on the Range Rooted in Immersion

667. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Cattārome, bhikkhave, jhāyī. Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo hoti, na samādhismiṃ gocarakusalo. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ gocarakusalo hoti, na samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī neva samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo hoti, na ca samādhismiṃ gocarakusalo. Idha pana, bhikkhave, ekacco jhāyī samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo ca hoti, samādhismiṃ gocarakusalo ca. Tatra, bhikkhave, yvāyaṃ jhāyī samādhismiṃ samādhikusalo ca hoti samādhismiṃ gocarakusalo ca ayaṃ imesaṃ catunnaṃ jhāyīnaṃ aggo ca seṭṭho ca mokkho ca uttamo ca pavaro ca. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gavā khīraṃ…pe… pavaro cā’’ti. Chaṭṭhaṃ.

667.At Savatthi. "Monks, there are these four meditators. Which four? Here, monks, a certain meditator is skilled in samādhi, but not skilled in the range of samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is skilled in the range of samādhi, but not skilled in samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is neither skilled in samādhi nor skilled in the range of samādhi. Here, monks, a certain meditator is both skilled in samādhi and skilled in the range of samādhi. Among these four, monks, the meditator who is both skilled in samādhi and skilled in the range of samādhi is the foremost, the best, the chief, the highest, and the most excellent. Just as, monks, from a cow comes milk… and the most excellent." The sixth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn34.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA883]] | S iii 266 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA883]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.6]]
> ◄  [[sn34.5-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn34.7-deepseek-pali]] ►
