---
sutta_code: "SN47.42"
sutta_title:
  - "Samudayasutta "
  - "Origination"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN47]]  / 🌐 [[SN47.42]]
> ◄  [[sn47.41-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn47.43-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 47. Satipaṭṭhānasaṁyutta: On Mindfulness Meditation

### V. The Deathless — SN47.42: Origin
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the origin and the ending of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. Listen …

And what is the origin of the body? The body originates from food. When food ceases, the body ends.

Feelings originate from contact. When contact ceases, feelings end.

The mind originates from name and form. When name and form cease, the mind ends.

Principles originate from attention. When focus ends, principles end.”

1"Catunnaṁ, bhikkhave, satipaṭṭhānānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha.

Ko ca, bhikkhave, kāyassa samudayo? Āhārasamudayā kāyassa samudayo; āhāranirodhā kāyassa atthaṅgamo.

Phassasamudayā vedanānaṁ samudayo; phassanirodhā vedanānaṁ atthaṅgamo.

Nāmarūpasamudayā cittassa samudayo; nāmarūpanirodhā cittassa atthaṅgamo.

Manasikārasamudayā dhammānaṁ samudayo; manasikāranirodhā dhammānaṁ atthaṅgamo"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn47.42-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA609]] | S v 184 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA609]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.58]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN47]]  / 🌐 [[SN47.42]]
> ◄  [[sn47.41-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn47.43-pali-sc]] ►
