---
sutta_code: "SN43.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Maggaṅgasutta "
  - "The Eightfold Path"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN43]]  / 🌐 [[SN43.11]]
> ◄  [[sn43.10-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn43.12-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 43. Asaṅkhatasaṁyutta: On the Unconditioned

### I. The First Chapter — SN43.11: The Path
#### B. Sujato


1“And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? The noble eightfold path. This is called the path that leads to the unconditioned.

So, mendicants, I’ve taught you the unconditioned and the path that leads to the unconditioned. Out of compassion, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice jhāna, mendicants! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction to you.”

1"Katamo ca, bhikkhave, asaṅkhatagāmimaggo? Ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, asaṅkhatagāmimaggo.

Iti kho, bhikkhave, desitaṁ vo mayā asaṅkhataṁ, desito asaṅkhatagāmimaggo. Yaṁ, bhikkhave, satthārā karaṇīyaṁ sāvakānaṁ hitesinā anukampakena anukampāṁ upādāya kataṁ vo taṁ mayā. Etāni, bhikkhave, rukkhamūlāni, etāni suññāgārāni. Jhāyatha, bhikkhave, mā pamādattha; mā pacchā vippaṭisārino ahuvattha. Ayaṁ vo amhākaṁ anusāsanī"ti.


Ekādasamaṁ.

Asaṅkhatasaṁyuttassa paṭhamo vaggo.

2Kāyo samatho savitakko,  
suññato satipaṭṭhānā;  
Sammappadhānā iddhipādā,  
indriyabalabojjhaṅgā;  
Maggena ekādasamaṁ,  
tassuddānaṁ pavuccati.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn43.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA890]] | S iv 361 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA890]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN43]]  / 🌐 [[SN43.11]]
> ◄  [[sn43.10-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn43.12-pali-sc]] ►
