---
sutta_code: "MN106"
sutta_pts: "M ii 261"
sutta_title:
  - "Āneñjasappāya Sutta "
  - "Conducive to the Imperturbable"
nikaya:
  - "MN "
  - "Majjhima Nikāya"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MN101-110"
  - "Devadahavagga"
  - "At Devadaha"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Meditation"
  - "Awakening"
sutta_topic:
  - "Meditation instructions"
  - "Liberations"
sutta_training:
  - "Samādhi"
  - "Paññā"
sutta_stage:
  - "Middle"
  - "Final"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Ananda"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[MA75]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[MA75]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN105]]  🌐 [[MN107]] ►

# MN106 - Āneñjasappāya Sutta - Conducive to the Imperturbable
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> Beginning with profound meditation absorption, the Buddha  goes on to deeper and deeper levels, showing how insight on this basis leads to the detaching of consciousness from any form of rebirth
Advanced meditation instruction: how the fourth jhana and the formless attainments can be developed and used as a basis for the realization of nibbana.

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Have taught the ways of practice suitable for attaining the imperturbable, the dimension of nothingness, and the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
The Buddha  has explained to us how to cross over the flood by relying on one support or the other and the deathless, namely the liberation of the mind through not grasping
> 
> Sensual pleasures are impermanent, hollow, false, and deceptive, sensual pleasures and  perceptions in this life and in lives to come; both of these are Māra’s domain, they conduce to bad, unskillful qualities such as desire, ill will, and aggression. And They create an obstacle for a noble disciple training here. giving them upmy mind, no longer limited, will become limitless and well developed.’
I am giving up what exists, what has come to be.’ In This way they gain equanimity. They Don’t approve, welcome, or keep clinging to that equanimity. So Their consciousness doesn’t rely on that and grasp it. A bhikkhu free of grasping becomes unbound
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn106-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA75]] | M ii 261 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA75]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.55]], [[MN140]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN106%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMN106%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN106%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN106%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Amn106-%20-file%3A%22MN105%22%20-file%3A%22MN107%22%20-file%3A%22MN106%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/mn106/en/sujato
> - Dhamma Gift: https://dhamma.gift/read/?q=mn106
> - The Buddhas Words: https://thebuddhaswords.net/mn/mn106.html


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN105]]  🌐 [[MN107]] ►
