---
sutta_code: "MN104"
sutta_pts: "M ii 243"
sutta_title:
  - "Sāmagāma Sutta "
  - "At Sāmagāma"
nikaya:
  - "MN "
  - "Majjhima Nikāya"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MN101-110"
  - "Devadahavagga"
  - "At Devadaha"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Awakening factors"
  - "Harmony"
  - "Discipline"
sutta_topic:
  - "Teachings"
  - "Core"
  - "Disputes avoid"
  - "Disciplinary issues"
  - "Cordiality"
sutta_training:
  - "Paññā"
  - "Samādhi"
  - "Sīla"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
  - "Training"
  - "Vinaya"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - "4 sammappadhānā _right efforts"
  - "4 satipaṭṭhānā"
  - "5 indriya/bala"
  - "Noble Eightfold Path"
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Ananda"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[MA196]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[MA196]], [[AN6.36]], [[DN33]], [[PLI-TV-KD14]], [[PLI-TV-PVR4]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN103]]  🌐 [[MN105]] ►

# MN104 - Sāmagāma Sutta - At Sāmagāma
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> Hearing of the death of the jain leader nigaṇṭha nātaputta, the Buddha  encourages the saṅgha to swiftly resolve any disputes. He lays down a series of seven methods for resolving disputes. These form the foundation for the monastic code

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Dispute about livelihood or the monastic code is a minor matter. But Should a dispute arise in the saṅgha concerning the path or the practice, that would be for the hurt and unhappiness of the people
Six roots of disputes: a bhikkhu is irritable and hostile, is offensive and contemptuous … they’re jealous and stingy … they’re devious and deceitful … they have wicked desires and wrong view … they’re attached to their own views, holding them tight
Disciplinary issues due to disputes, accusations, offenses, or proceedings. These Are the four kinds of disciplinary issues
You should undertake and follow these six warm-hearted qualities, do you see any criticism, large or small, that you could not endure? No
> 
> The things I have taught from my direct knowledge, that is, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path
If you see such a root of quarrels in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. If You don’t see it, you should practice so that it doesn’t come up in the future. That’s How to give up this bad root of quarrels
Seven methods for the settlement of any disciplinary issues that might arise.Removal In the presence of those concerned is applicable. Removal by accurate recollection is applicable. Removal due to recovery from madness is applicable. The offense should be acknowledged. The decision of a majority. A verdict of aggravated misconduct. Covering over with grass
A bhikkhu consistently treats their spiritual companions with bodily, verbally and mentally  kindness, both in public and in private, shares without reservation any material possessions they have gained by legitimate means, lives according to the precepts and according to the view  shared with their spiritual companions
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn104-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA196]] | M ii 243 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA196]], [[AN6.36]], [[DN33]], [[PLI-TV-KD14]], [[PLI-TV-PVR4]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN103]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN104%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMN104%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN104%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN104%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Amn104-%20-file%3A%22MN103%22%20-file%3A%22MN105%22%20-file%3A%22MN104%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato
> - Dhamma Gift: https://dhamma.gift/read/?q=mn104
> - The Buddhas Words: https://thebuddhaswords.net/mn/mn104.html


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN103]]  🌐 [[MN105]] ►
