---
sutta_code: "MN103"
sutta_pts: "M ii 238"
sutta_title:
  - "Kinti Sutta "
  - "Is This What You Think Of Me?"
nikaya:
  - "MN "
  - "Majjhima Nikāya"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MN101-110"
  - "Devadahavagga"
  - "At Devadaha"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Awakening factors"
  - "Harmony"
  - "Supports"
sutta_topic:
  - "Teachings"
  - "Core"
  - "Disputes avoid"
  - "Accusations"
sutta_training:
  - "Sīla"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - "4 sammappadhānā _right efforts"
  - "4 satipaṭṭhānā"
  - "5 indriya/bala"
  - "Noble Eightfold Path"
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: ""
parallels_partilal: ""
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN102]]  🌐 [[MN104]] ►

# MN103 - Kinti Sutta - Is This What You Think Of Me?
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> The Buddha  teaches the monks to not dispute about the fundamental teachings, but to always strive for harmony

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> The Buddha  is compassionate and wants what’s best for us. He Teaches out of compassion. so you should train in these things in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarrelin
So you should remember what has been incorrectly memorized as incorrectly memorized and what has been correctly memorized as correctly memorized.
One of the bhikkhus might commit an offense or transgression, only if you can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.’ If That’s what you think, then it’s appropriate to speak to them.
If you cannot draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.’ Don’t Underestimate the value of equanimity for such a person.
> 
> Each and every one of you should train in the things I have taught from my direct knowledge, that is: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path
Two venerables disagree on both the meaning and the phrasing, or either one of them, so you should approach whichever bhikkhu you think is most amenable of both sides and say to them should know that this is how such disagreement on the meaning and the phrasing comes to be. Please Don’t get into a fight about this.
But for me to be troubled and the other individual to get hurt for  they’re irritable and hostile. And they hold fast to their viewsbut that's is a minor matter. It’s More important that I can draw them away from the unskillful
Avoid and solve mutual tale-bearing came up, and when helping each other don't  glorify yourselves or put others down. practice in line with the teaching, with no legitimate grounds for rebuke and criticism.”
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn103-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M ii 238 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
|  |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN104]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN103%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMN103%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN103%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN103%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Amn103-%20-file%3A%22MN102%22%20-file%3A%22MN104%22%20-file%3A%22MN103%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/mn103/en/sujato
> - Dhamma Gift: https://dhamma.gift/read/?q=mn103
> - The Buddhas Words: https://thebuddhaswords.net/mn/mn103.html


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN102]]  🌐 [[MN104]] ►
