---
sutta_code: "MA27"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "梵志陀然 "
  - "With Dhanañjāni"
nikaya:
  - "MA "
  - "Madhyama Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MA21-30"
  - ""
  - "MA 3 Sāriputta"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Kamma"
  - "Love"
sutta_topic:
  - "Livelihood"
  - "Heaven way to"
sutta_training:
  - "Samādhi"
  - "Sīla"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
  - "Intro"
sutta_method:
  - "qa"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
  - "Practical"
sutta_prominence:
  - ""
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Sariputta"
sutta_audience:
  - "Brahmins"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: ""
parallels_partilal: ""
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA26]]  🌐 [[MA28]] ►

# MA27 - 梵志陀然 - With Dhanañjāni
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> A corrupt tax-collector is redeemed by his encounter with venerable Sāriputta
A poignant story of a lay person whose welfare was of special concern to ven. Sariputta, this discourse teaches two lessons in heedfulness. (1) if you're engaging in wrong livelihood, don't expect to escape the karmic consequences even if you're doing it to fulfil your duties to your family, parents, or friends. (2) don't be satisfied with mundane levels of attainment in meditation when there is still more to be done

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Someone who behaves in a principled and just manner for the sake of their family.
For principled and moral conduct is better than unprincipled and immoral conduct
bhikkhus, Sāriputta, after establishing dhanañjāni in the inferior Brahmā realm, got up from his seat and left while there was still more left to do.”
> 
> Someone was to behave in an unprincipled and unjust way for the sake of their family.Because Of this the wardens of hell would drag them to hell. 
Could they get out of being dragged to hell by pleading that they had acted for the sake of their parents? Or could their parents save them by pleading that the acts had been done for their sake?
Path to companionship with Brahmā
Firstly, a person meditates spreading a heart full of love, compassion, rejoice or equanimity  to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love, compassion, rejoice or equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma27-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
|  |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.15]], [[AN4.178]], [[MA152]], [[MN143]], [[MN99]], [[SN3.17]], [[SN41.10]], [[SN41.7]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA27%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMA27%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA27%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA27%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Ama27-%20-file%3A%22MA26%22%20-file%3A%22MA28%22%20-file%3A%22MA27%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ma27/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA26]]  🌐 [[MA28]] ►
