---
sutta_code: "AN10.110"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.110]]
> ◄  [[an10.109-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[an10.111-deepseek-pali]] ►

# AN 10.110 Niddhamanīyasuttaṃ

## AN 10.110 The Banishment Discourse

110. ‘‘Dasayime, bhikkhave, niddhamanīyā dhammā. Katame dasa? Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi niddhantā hoti; ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa niddhantā honti; sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti.

110.“Monks, there are these ten qualities to be expelled. What ten? For one with right view, wrong view is expelled; and the many evil, unwholesome qualities that arise dependent on wrong view are also expelled; and dependent on right view, many wholesome qualities go to the fulfillment of development.

‘‘Sammāsaṅkappassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo niddhanto hoti…pe… sammāvācassa bhikkhave, micchāvācā niddhantā hoti… sammākammantassa, bhikkhave, micchākammanto niddhanto hoti… sammāājīvassa, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo niddhanto hoti… sammāvāyāmassa, bhikkhave, micchāvāyāmo niddhanto hoti… sammāsatissa, bhikkhave, micchāsati niddhantā hoti… sammāsamādhissa, bhikkhave, micchāsamādhi niddhanto hoti… sammāñāṇissa, bhikkhave, micchāñāṇaṃ niddhantaṃ hoti….

For one with right intention, wrong intention is expelled… For one with right speech, wrong speech is expelled… For one with right action, wrong action is expelled… For one with right livelihood, wrong livelihood is expelled… For one with right effort, wrong effort is expelled… For one with right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is expelled… For one with right samādhi, wrong samādhi is expelled… For one with right knowledge, wrong knowledge is expelled…

‘‘Sammāvimuttissa, bhikkhave, micchāvimutti niddhantā hoti; ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa niddhantā honti; sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchanti. Ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa niddhamanīyā dhammā’’ti. Dasamaṃ.

For one with right liberation, wrong liberation is expelled; and the many evil, unwholesome qualities that arise dependent on wrong liberation are also expelled; and dependent on right liberation, many wholesome qualities go to the fulfillment of development. These, monks, are the ten qualities to be expelled.” The tenth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.110-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 220 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.110]]
> ◄  [[an10.109-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[an10.111-deepseek-pali]] ►
