---
sutta_code: "AN10.111"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.111]]
> ◄  [[an10.110-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[an10.112-deepseek-pali]] ►

# AN 10.111 Paṭhamaasekhasuttaṃ

## AN 10.111 The First Discourse on an Adept

111. Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca –

111.Then a certain bhikkhu approached the Blessed One; having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, that bhikkhu said this to the Blessed One:

‘‘‘Asekho asekho’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kittāvatā bhante, bhikkhu asekho hotī’’ti? ‘‘Idha, bhikkhu, bhikkhu asekhāya sammādiṭṭhiyā samannāgato hoti, asekhena sammāsaṅkappena samannāgato hoti, asekhāya sammāvācāya samannāgato hoti, asekhena sammākammantena samannāgato hoti, asekhena sammāājīvena samannāgato hoti, asekhena sammāvāyāmena samannāgato hoti, asekhāya sammāsatiyā samannāgato hoti, asekhena sammāsamādhinā samannāgato hoti, asekhena sammāñāṇena samannāgato hoti, asekhāya sammāvimuttiyā samannāgato hoti. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhu, bhikkhu asekho hotī’’ti. Ekādasamaṃ.

“‘Adept, adept,’ venerable sir, it is said. In what way, venerable sir, is a bhikkhu an adept?” “Here, bhikkhu, a bhikkhu possesses the right view of an adept, possesses the right intention of an adept, possesses the right speech of an adept, possesses the right action of an adept, possesses the right livelihood of an adept, possesses the right effort of an adept, possesses the right mindfulness of an adept, possesses the right samādhi of an adept, possesses the right knowledge of an adept, possesses the right liberation of an adept. It is in this way, bhikkhu, that a bhikkhu is an adept.” The eleventh.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.111-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA748]] | A v 221 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA748]], [[SN45.55]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.111]]
> ◄  [[an10.110-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[an10.112-deepseek-pali]] ►
