---
sutta_code: "AN10.103"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.103]]
> ◄  [[an10.102-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[an10.104-deepseek-pali]] ►

# AN 10.103 Micchattasuttaṃ

## AN 10.103 The Discourse on Wrongness

103. ‘‘Micchattaṃ, bhikkhave, āgamma virādhanā hoti, no ārādhanā. Kathañca, bhikkhave, micchattaṃ āgamma virādhanā hoti, no ārādhanā? Micchādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo pahoti, micchāsaṅkappassa micchāvācā pahoti, micchāvācassa micchākammanto pahoti, micchākammantassa micchāājīvo pahoti, micchāājīvassa micchāvāyāmo pahoti, micchāvāyāmassa micchāsati pahoti, micchāsatissa micchāsamādhi pahoti, micchāsamādhissa micchāñāṇaṃ pahoti, micchāñāṇissa [micchāñāṇassa (pī. ka.)] micchāvimutti pahoti. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, micchattaṃ āgamma virādhanā hoti, no ārādhanā.

103."Bhikkhus, by resorting to wrongness, there is failure, not attainment. And how, bhikkhus, by resorting to wrongness is there failure, not attainment? For one with wrong view, bhikkhus, wrong intention comes to be; for one with wrong intention, wrong speech comes to be; for one with wrong speech, wrong action comes to be; for one with wrong action, wrong livelihood comes to be; for one with wrong livelihood, wrong effort comes to be; for one with wrong effort, wrong mindfulness comes to be; for one with wrong mindfulness, wrong samādhi comes to be; for one with wrong samādhi, wrong knowledge comes to be; for one with wrong knowledge, wrong liberation comes to be. Thus, bhikkhus, by resorting to wrongness, there is failure, not attainment."

‘‘Sammattaṃ, bhikkhave, āgamma ārādhanā hoti, no virādhanā. Kathañca, bhikkhave, sammattaṃ āgamma ārādhanā hoti, no virādhanā? Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo pahoti, sammāsaṅkappassa sammāvācā pahoti, sammāvācassa sammākammanto pahoti, sammākammantassa sammāājīvo pahoti, sammāājīvassa sammāvāyāmo pahoti, sammāvāyāmassa sammāsati pahoti, sammāsatissa sammāsamādhi pahoti, sammāsamādhissa sammāñāṇaṃ pahoti, sammāñāṇissa [sammāñāṇassa (pī. ka.)] sammāvimutti pahoti. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sammattaṃ āgamma ārādhanā hoti, no virādhanā’’ti. Tatiyaṃ.

"Bhikkhus, by resorting to rightness, there is attainment, not failure. And how, bhikkhus, by resorting to rightness is there attainment, not failure? For one with right view, bhikkhus, right intention comes to be; for one with right intention, right speech comes to be; for one with right speech, right action comes to be; for one with right action, right livelihood comes to be; for one with right livelihood, right effort comes to be; for one with right effort, right mindfulness comes to be; for one with right mindfulness, right samādhi comes to be; for one with right samādhi, right knowledge comes to be; for one with right knowledge, right liberation comes to be. Thus, bhikkhus, by resorting to rightness, there is attainment, not failure." Third.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.103-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA786]] | A v 211 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA786]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.103]]
> ◄  [[an10.102-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[an10.104-deepseek-pali]] ►
