---
sutta_code: "SN53.1"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN53.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn53.13-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

#### Links
---
Sutta Overview: [[SN53.1]] 
Nikaya: [[SN]] [[sn-sujato-pali]]
Adjacent Suttas: [[sn53.2-sujato-pali]]
Division: [[SN53]] , [[sn53-sujato-pali]]

---

## 53. Jhānasaṁyutta: On jhānas

### I. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges — SN53.1-12: Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, there are these four jhānas. What four?

It’s when a bhikkhu, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first jhāna, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while thinking and considering.

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second jhāna, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without thinking and considering.

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third jhāna, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth jhāna, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

These are the four jhānas.


2The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the four jhānas slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.


And how does a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the four jhānas slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment?

It’s when a bhikkhu, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first jhāna, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while thinking and considering.

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second jhāna … third jhāna … fourth jhāna.


That’s how a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the four jhānas slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

(To be expanded for each of the different rivers as in SN45.91-102.)


3Six on slanting to the east,  
and six on slanting to the ocean;  
these two sixes make twelve,  
and that’s how this chapter is recited.

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Tatra kho … pe … "cattārome, bhikkhave, jhānā. Katame cattāro?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṁ savicāraṁ vivekajaṁ pītisukhaṁ paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati.

Vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati.

Pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca vihārati sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṁvedeti, yaṁ taṁ ariyā ācikkhanti: ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati.

Sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṁ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṁ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati.

Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro jhānāti.


2Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro jhāne bhāvento cattāro jhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.


Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro jhāne bhāvento cattāro jhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṁ savicāraṁ vivekajaṁ pītisukhaṁ paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati.

Vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā … pe … dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ … tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ … catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati.


Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro jhāne bhāvento cattāro jhāne bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro"ti.

Dvādasamaṁ.

Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo paṭhamo.


3Cha pācīnato ninnā,  
cha ninnā ca samuddato;  
Dvete cha dvādasa honti,  
vaggo tena pavuccatīti.

[[sn53#content]][[Clean links 2/Bodhi epubs/Imported/SN Bodhi 3/SN53/SN53.13-22#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn53.1-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN53.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn53.13-sujato-pali]] ►
