---
sutta_code: "SN28.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Pītisutta "
  - "Rapture"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN28]]  / 🌐 [[SN28.3]]
> ◄  [[sn28.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn28.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 28. Sāriputtasaṁyutta: With Sāriputta

### I. With Sāriputta — SN28.3: Rapture
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Venerable Ānanda saw Venerable Sāriputta and said to him:

“Reverend Sāriputta, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. What meditation were you practicing today?”

2“Reverend, with the fading away of rapture, I entered and remained in the third jhāna, where I meditated with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ But it didn’t occur to me: ‘I am entering the third jhāna’ or ‘I have entered the third jhāna’ or ‘I am emerging from the third jhāna’.”

“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated ego, possessiveness, and the underlying tendency to conceit. That’s why it didn’t occur to you: ‘I am entering the third jhāna’ or ‘I have entered the third jhāna’ or ‘I am emerging from the third jhāna’.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Addasā kho āyasmā ānando … pe …

"vippasannāni kho te, āvuso sāriputta, indriyāni; parisuddho mukhavaṇṇo pariyodāto. Katamenāyasmā sāriputto ajja vihārena vihāsī"ti?

2"Idhāhaṁ, āvuso, pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca vihāsiṁ sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṁvedemi; yaṁ taṁ ariyā ācikkhanti ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja viharāmi. Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, na evaṁ hoti: ‘Ahaṁ tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpanno’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ tatiyā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā"ti.

Tathā hi panāyasmato sāriputtassa dīgharattaṁ ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā susamūhatā. Tasmā āyasmato sāriputtassa na evaṁ hoti: "‘Ahaṁ tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpanno’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ tatiyā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn28.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 236 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN28]]  / 🌐 [[SN28.3]]
> ◄  [[sn28.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn28.4-sujato-pali]] ►
