---
sutta_code: "SN28.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Avitakkasutta "
  - "Without Placing the Mind"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN28]]  / 🌐 [[SN28.2]]
> ◄  [[sn28.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn28.3-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 28. Sāriputtasaṁyutta: With Sāriputta

### I. With Sāriputta — SN28.2: Without Placing the Mind
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Venerable Ānanda saw Venerable Sāriputta and said to him:

“Reverend Sāriputta, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. What meditation were you practicing today?”

2“Reverend, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without thinking and considering.

But it didn’t occur to me: ‘I am entering the second absorption’ or ‘I have entered the second absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the second absorption’.”

“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated ego, possessiveness, and the underlying tendency to conceit. That’s why it didn’t occur to you: ‘I am entering the second absorption’ or ‘I have entered the second absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the second absorption’.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Addasā kho āyasmā ānando … pe … āyasmantaṁ sāriputtaṁ etadavoca:

"vippasannāni kho te, āvuso sāriputta, indriyāni; parisuddho mukhavaṇṇo pariyodāto. Katamenāyasmā sāriputto ajja vihārena vihāsī"ti?

2"Idhāhaṁ, āvuso, vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja viharāmi.

Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, na evaṁ hoti: ‘Ahaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpanno’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ dutiyā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā"ti.

Tathā hi panāyasmato sāriputtassa dīgharattaṁ ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā susamūhatā. Tasmā āyasmato sāriputtassa na evaṁ hoti: "‘Ahaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpanno’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ dutiyā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn28.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 235 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN28]]  / 🌐 [[SN28.2]]
> ◄  [[sn28.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn28.3-sujato-pali]] ►
