---
sutta_code: "SN28.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Upekkhāsutta "
  - "Equanimity"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN28]]  / 🌐 [[SN28.4]]
> ◄  [[sn28.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn28.5-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 28. Sāriputtasaṁyutta: With Sāriputta

### I. With Sāriputta — SN28.4: Equanimity
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Venerable Ānanda saw Venerable Sāriputta and said to him:

“Reverend Sāriputta, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. What meditation were you practicing today?”

2“Reverend, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, I entered and remained in the fourth jhāna, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. But it didn’t occur to me: ‘I am entering the fourth jhāna’ or ‘I have entered the fourth jhāna’ or ‘I am emerging from the fourth jhāna’.”

“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated ego, possessiveness, and the underlying tendency to conceit. That’s why it didn’t occur to you: ‘I am entering the fourth jhāna’ or ‘I have entered the fourth jhāna’ or ‘I am emerging from the fourth jhāna’.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Addasā kho āyasmā ānando … pe …

"vippasannāni kho te, āvuso sāriputta, indriyāni; parisuddho mukhavaṇṇo pariyodāto. Katamenāyasmā sāriputto ajja vihārena vihāsī"ti?

2"Idhāhaṁ, āvuso, sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṁ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṁ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja viharāmi. Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, na evaṁ hoti: ‘Ahaṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ samāpanno’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ catutthā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā"ti.

Tathā hi panāyasmato sāriputtassa dīgharattaṁ ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā susamūhatā. Tasmā āyasmato sāriputtassa na evaṁ hoti: "‘Ahaṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ samāpajjāmī’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ samāpanno’ti vā ‘Ahaṁ catutthā jhānā vuṭṭhito’ti vā"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn28.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 237 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN28]]  / 🌐 [[SN28.4]]
> ◄  [[sn28.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn28.5-sujato-pali]] ►
