---
sutta_code: "SN54.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Padīpopamasutta "
  - "The Simile of the Lamp"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.8]]
> ◄  [[sn54.7-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn54.9-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 54. Ānāpānasaṁyutta: On Breath Meditation

### I. One Thing — SN54.8: The Simile of the Lamp
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. How so?

2It’s when a bhikkhu has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut. They sit down cross-legged, with their body straight, and establish mindfulness right there. Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. When breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ When breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’ … They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’

That’s how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, is very fruitful and beneficial.


3Before my awakening — when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening — I too usually practiced this kind of meditation. And while I was usually practicing this kind of meditation neither my body nor my eyes became fatigued. And my mind was freed from defilements by not grasping.

4Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘May neither my body nor my eyes became fatigued. And may my mind be freed from grasping without defilements.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

5Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I give up memories and thoughts of the lay life.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

6Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

7Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

8Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

9Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

10Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

11Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, may I enter and remain in the first jhāna, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while thinking and considering.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

12Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, may I enter and remain in the second jhāna, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without thinking and considering.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

13Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘With the fading away of rapture, may I enter and remain in the third jhāna, where I will meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare: “Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.”’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

14Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, may I enter and remain in the fourth jhāna, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

15Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that “space is infinite”, may I enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

16Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that “consciousness is infinite”, may I enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

17Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that “there is nothing at all”, may I enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

18Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, may I enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

19Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, may I enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling.’ So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

20When mindfulness of breathing has been developed and cultivated in this way, if they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it. If they feel a painful feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it. If they feel a neutral feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it.


21If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it detached.

Feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’

22Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. As the oil and the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to lack of fuel. In the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body approaching.’ Feeling the end of life approaching, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life approaching.’ They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’”

1"Ānāpānassatisamādhi, bhikkhave, bhāvito bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṁso. Kathaṁ bhāvito ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatisamādhi kathaṁ bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṁso?

2Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṁ ābhujitvā ujuṁ kāyaṁ paṇidhāya parimukhaṁ satiṁ upaṭṭhapetvā. So satova assasati, satova passasati. Dīghaṁ vā assasanto ‘dīghaṁ assasāmī’ti pajānāti … pe … ‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati.

Evaṁ bhāvito kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatisamādhi evaṁ bahulīkato mahapphalo hoti mahānisaṁso.


3Ahampi sudaṁ, bhikkhave, pubbeva sambodhā anabhisambuddho bodhisattova samāno iminā vihārena bahulaṁ viharāmi. Tassa mayhaṁ, bhikkhave, iminā vihārena bahulaṁ vihārato neva kāyo kilamati na cakkhūni; anupādāya ca me āsavehi cittaṁ vimucci.

4Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘neva me kāyo kilameyya na cakkhūni, anupādāya ca me āsavehi cittaṁ vimucceyyā’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

5Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘ye me gehasitā sarasaṅkappā te pahīyeyyun’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

6Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘appaṭikūle paṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

7Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘paṭikūle appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

8Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘paṭikūle ca appaṭikūle ca paṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

9Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘paṭikūle ca appaṭikūle ca appaṭikūlasaññī vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

10Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘appaṭikūlañca paṭikūlañca tadubhayaṁ abhinivajjetvā upekkhako vihareyyaṁ sato sampajāno’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

11Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṁ savicāraṁ vivekajaṁ pītisukhaṁ paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

12Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

13Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca vihareyyaṁ sato ca sampajāno, sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṁvedeyyaṁ, yaṁ taṁ ariyā ācikkhanti – upekkhako satimā sukhavihārīti tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

14Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṁ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṁ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

15Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘sabbaso rūpasaññānaṁ samatikkamā paṭighasaññānaṁ atthaṅgamā nānattasaññānaṁ amanasikārā ananto ākāsoti ākāsānañcāyatanaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

16Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaṁ samatikkamma anantaṁ viññāṇanti viññāṇañcāyatanaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

17Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘sabbaso viññāṇañcāyatanaṁ samatikkamma natthi kiñcīti ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

18Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

19Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya: ‘sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, ayameva ānāpānassatisamādhi sādhukaṁ manasi kātabbo.

20Evaṁ bhāvite kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatisamādhimhi evaṁ bahulīkate, sukhañce vedanāṁ vedayati, sā ‘aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti; dukkhañce vedanāṁ vedayati, sā ‘aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti; adukkhamasukhañce vedanāṁ vedayati, ‘sā aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti.


21Sukhañce vedanāṁ vedayati, visaṁyutto naṁ vedayati; dukkhañce vedanāṁ vedayati, visaṁyutto naṁ vedayati; adukkhamasukhañce vedanāṁ vedayati, visaṁyutto naṁ vedayati.

So kāyapariyantikaṁ vedanāṁ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṁ vedanāṁ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, jīvitapariyantikaṁ vedanāṁ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṁ vedanāṁ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, ‘kāyassa bhedā uddhaṁ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānāti.

22Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, telañca paṭicca, vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyeyya, tasseva telassa ca vaṭṭiyā ca pariyādānā anāhāro nibbāyeyya; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāyapariyantikaṁ vedanāṁ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṁ vedanāṁ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, jīvitapariyantikaṁ vedanāṁ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṁ vedanāṁ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, ‘kāyassa bhedā uddhaṁ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānātī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn54.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA814]] | S v 316 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA814]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.8]], [[AN13]], [[MN44]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.8]]
> ◄  [[sn54.7-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn54.9-pali-sc]] ►
