---
sutta_code: "SN54.20"
sutta_title:
  - "Āsavakkhayasutta "
  - "The Destruction of the Taints"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.20]]
> ◄  [[sn54.19-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 54. Ānāpānasaṁyutta: On Breath Meditation

### II. The Second Chapter — SN54.20: The Ending of Defilements
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it leads to the ending of defilements. And how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies, completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements?

It’s when a bhikkhu — gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut — sits down cross-legged, with their body straight, and focuses their mindfulness right there. …

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’


That’s how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies, completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements.”


1" …  Āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattati. Kathaṁ bhāvito ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatisamādhi kathaṁ bahulīkato saṁyojanappahānāya saṁvattati … anusayasamugghātāya saṁvattati … addhānapariññāya saṁvattati … āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattati?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā … pe … paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmīti sikkhati, paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmīti sikkhati.


Evaṁ bhāvito kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatisamādhi evaṁ bahulīkato saṁyojanappahānāya saṁvattati … pe … anusayasamugghātāya saṁvattati … pe … addhānapariññāya saṁvattati … pe … āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattatī"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Dutiyo vaggo.

2Icchānaṅgalaṁ kaṅkheyyaṁ,  
ānandā apare duve;  
Bhikkhū saṁyojanānusayā,  
addhānaṁ āsavakkhayanti.

Ānāpānasaṁyuttaṁ dasamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn54.20-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 340 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.10]], [[MN44]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.20]]
> ◄  [[sn54.19-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►
