---
sutta_code: "SN54.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Bojjhaṅgasutta "
  - "Factors of Enlightenment"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.2]]
> ◄  [[sn54.1-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn54.3-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 54. Ānāpānasaṁyutta: On Breath Meditation

### I. One Thing — SN54.2: Awakening Factors
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It’s when a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of breathing together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and beneficial.”

1"Ānāpānassati, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsā. Kathaṁ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati kathaṁ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsā?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ānāpānassatisahagataṁ satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ, ānāpānassatisahagataṁ dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti … pe … ānāpānassatisahagataṁ upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ.

Evaṁ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati evaṁ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsā"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn54.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA804]] | S v 312 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA804]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.8]], [[AN13]], [[MN44]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.2]]
> ◄  [[sn54.1-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn54.3-pali-sc]] ►
