---
sutta_code: "SN54.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyaphalasutta "
  - "Fruits (2)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.5]]
> ◄  [[sn54.4-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn54.6-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 54. Ānāpānasaṁyutta: On Breath Meditation

### I. One Thing — SN54.5: Fruits (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It’s when a bhikkhu has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut. They sit down cross-legged, with their body straight, and establish mindfulness right there.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. …

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and beneficial.


2When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect seven fruits and benefits. What seven?

You attain enlightenment early on in this very life.

If not, you attain enlightenment at the time of death.

If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters you’re extinguished in between one life and the next … you’re extinguished upon landing … you’re extinguished without extra effort … you’re extinguished with extra effort … you head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm …

When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect these seven fruits and benefits.”

1"Ānāpānassati, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsā. Kathaṁ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati kathaṁ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsā?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṁ ābhujitvā ujuṁ kāyaṁ paṇidhāya parimukhaṁ satiṁ upaṭṭhapetvā.

So satova assasati, satova passasati … pe … ‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati.

Evaṁ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati evaṁ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsā.


2Evaṁ bhāvitāya kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatiyā evaṁ bahulīkatāya satta phalā sattānisaṁsā pāṭikaṅkhā. Katame satta phalā sattānisaṁsā?

Diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṁ ārādheti;

No ce diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṁ ārādheti. Atha maraṇakāle aññaṁ ārādheti;

No ce diṭṭheva dhamme paṭikacca aññaṁ ārādheti, no ce maraṇakāle aññaṁ ārādheti. Atha pañcannaṁ orambhāgiyānaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ parikkhayā antarāparinibbāyī hoti …

… upahaccaparinibbāyī hoti …

… asaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti …

… sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyī hoti …

… uddhaṁsoto hoti akaniṭṭhagāmī …

Evaṁ bhāvitāya kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatiyā evaṁ bahulīkatāya ime satta phalā sattānisaṁsā pāṭikaṅkhā"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn54.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA804]] | S v 314 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA804]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.8]], [[AN13]], [[MN44]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.5]]
> ◄  [[sn54.4-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn54.6-pali-sc]] ►
