---
sutta_code: "MA196"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "周那 "
  - "To Cuṇḍa"
nikaya:
  - "MA "
  - "Madhyama Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MA191-200"
  - ""
  - "MA 16 Great Division second"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Awakening factors"
  - "Discipline"
  - "Harmony"
sutta_topic:
  - "Teachings core"
  - "Disciplinary issues"
  - "Cordiality"
  - "Disputes roots"
sutta_training:
  - "Paññā"
  - "Samādhi"
  - "Sīla"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
  - "Training"
  - "Vinaya"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Ananda"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: ""
parallels_partilal: ""
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA195]]  🌐 [[MA197]] ►

# MA196 - 周那 - To Cuṇḍa
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> Hearing of the death of the jain leader nigaṇṭha nātaputta, the Buddha  encourages the saṅgha to swiftly resolve any disputes. He lays down a series of seven methods for resolving disputes. These form the foundation for the monastic code

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Dispute about livelihood or the monastic code is a minor matter. But Should a dispute arise in the saṅgha concerning the path or the practice, that would be for the hurt and unhappiness of the people
Six roots of disputes: a bhikkhu is angry and resentful, silent sulking . . . avarice and envy . . . flattery and deceit . . . shamelessness and recklessness . . . evil desire and wrong view
Seven kinds of settlement of litigation.
One: settlement of litigation by encounter; two: settlement of litigation 
by [loss of] memory; three: settlement of litigation by non-insanity
6 principles of cordiality A bhikkhu consistently treats their spiritual companions with bodily, verbally and mentally  kindness,
> 
> The things I have taught from my direct knowledge, that is, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path
If you see such a root of quarrels in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. If You don’t see it, you should practice so that it doesn’t come up in the future. That’s How to give up this bad root of quarrels
 four: 
settlement of litigation by self-confession; five: settlement of litigation 
by [pronouncement of] <bad character>;134 six: settlement of litigation 
by circulating around; seven: settlement of litigation that is like a broom 
for sweeping away excrement.
 shares without reservation any material possessions they have gained by legitimate means, lives according to the precepts and according to the view  shared with their spiritual companions.  in this way 
you will [dwell] together in harmony after I am gone:
> 

> [!info] Similes
> Head on fire like one should practice

---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma196-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
|  |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN103]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA196%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMA196%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA196%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA196%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Ama196-%20-file%3A%22MA195%22%20-file%3A%22MA197%22%20-file%3A%22MA196%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ma196/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA195]]  🌐 [[MA197]] ►
