---
sutta_code: "MA194"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "跋陀和利 "
  - "With Bhaddāli"
nikaya:
  - "MA "
  - "Madhyama Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MA191-200"
  - ""
  - "MA 16 Great Division second"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Decay"
  - "Discipline"
  - "Skillful qualities"
sutta_topic:
  - "Dhamma decay"
  - "Admonishing"
  - "Discipline benefits"
  - "Mistakes dealing with"
  - "Development gradual"
sutta_training:
  - "Samādhi"
  - "Sīla"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
  - "Middle"
sutta_method:
  - "qa"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[EA49.7]], [[MA192]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[JA371]], [[MA72]], [[EA24.8]], [[JA428]], [[PLI-TV-KD10]], [[DHP\|DHP3]], [[DHP\|DHP328]], [[SNP1.3]], [[DHP\|DHP329]], [[DHP\|DHP330]], [[DHP\|DHP4]], [[DHP\|DHP5]], [[DHP\|DHP6]], [[THAG4]].3, [[THAG8]].1, [[UD5.9]], [[MN31]], [[MA185]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA193]]  🌐 [[MA195]] ►

# MA194 - 跋陀和利 - With Bhaddāli
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> A monk refuses to follow the rule forbidding eating after noon, but is filled with remorse and forgiven

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it. 
For it is growth in the training of the noble one to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.
 take a bhikkhu who does fulfill the training according to the teacher’s instructions, while they’re living withdrawn, they’re not reprimanded by the teacher, by sensible spiritual companions after examination, by deities, or by themselves
Take some other monk who gets by with mere faith and love. In Such a case, the monks say: ‘reverends, this monk gets by with mere faith and love. If We punish him, repeatedly pressuring him—no, let him not lose what little faith and love he has
In former  times, when few rules had been promulgated, many monks observed and 
upheld them?
Because it has not done this before, it still resorts to some tricks, dodges, and evasions. But With regular and gradual practice it quells that bad habit.
> 
> I made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me that, as this rule was being laid down by the Buddha  and the saṅgha was undertaking it, I announced I would not try to keep it. 
Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future
 being reprimanded in this way, they realize the 4 jhanas and the 3 knowledges, knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. 
When they’re freed, they know they’re freed
Take a monk who is a frequent offender
When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue. He displays annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He doesn’t proceed properly, he doesn’t fall in line, he doesn’t proceed to get past it, and he doesn’t say: ‘I’ll do what pleases the saṅgha.’ In Such a case the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is not quickly settled
When the sangha of monks had acquired [worldly] gains, the sangha then found delight in fine things, wishing to 
cut off this delight in fine things, established rules for his disciples. In the same way for becoming very famous . . . elders becoming known to the  king . . . being of great merit . . . having much learning
When a bhikkhu has an adept’s right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. 
A bhikkhu with these ten factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation
> 

> [!info] Similes
> Person with one eye is protected by his friends, like someone with little faith
Horse colt training, like bhikkhus training

---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma194-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA49.7]], [[MA192]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[JA371]], [[MA72]], [[EA24.8]], [[JA428]], [[PLI-TV-KD10]], [[DHP\|DHP3]], [[DHP\|DHP328]], [[SNP1.3]], [[DHP\|DHP329]], [[DHP\|DHP330]], [[DHP\|DHP4]], [[DHP\|DHP5]], [[DHP\|DHP6]], [[THAG4]].3, [[THAG8]].1, [[UD5.9]], [[MN31]], [[MA185]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN107]], [[SN16.13]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA194%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMA194%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA194%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA194%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Ama194-%20-file%3A%22MA193%22%20-file%3A%22MA195%22%20-file%3A%22MA194%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ma194/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA193]]  🌐 [[MA195]] ►
