---
sutta_code: "SN25.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Samphassajasutta "
  - "Feeling"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN25]]  / 🌐 [[SN25.5]]
> ◄  [[sn25.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn25.6-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses



## 25. Okkantasaṁyutta: On Arrival

### I. The Eye — SN25.5: Feeling
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, feeling born of eye contact is impermanent, perishing, and changing. Feeling born of ear contact, feeling born of nose contact, feeling born of tongue contact, feeling born of body contact, and feeling born of mind contact are impermanent, perishing, and changing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these principles is called a follower by faith. …”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Cakkhusamphassajā, bhikkhave, vedanā aniccā vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī; sotasamphassajā vedanā … pe … ghānasamphassajā vedanā … pe … jivhāsamphassajā vedanā … pe … kāyasamphassajā vedanā … pe … manosamphassajā vedanā aniccā vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī.

Yo, bhikkhave, ime dhamme evaṁ saddahati adhimuccati, ayaṁ vuccati ‘saddhānusārī … pe … sambodhiparāyano’"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn25.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 226 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN70]], [[MN22]], [[SN48.12]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN25]]  / 🌐 [[SN25.5]]
> ◄  [[sn25.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn25.6-sujato-pali]] ►
