---
sutta_code: "SN25.10"
sutta_title:
  - "Khandhasutta "
  - "Aggregates"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN25]]  / 🌐 [[SN25.10]]
> ◄  [[sn25.9-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses



## 25. Okkantasaṁyutta: On Arrival

### I. The Eye — SN25.10: The Aggregates
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, form is impermanent, perishing, and changing. Feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are impermanent, perishing, and changing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these principles is called a follower by faith. They’ve arrived at inevitability regarding the right path, they’ve arrived at the level of the good person, and they’ve transcended the level of the bad person. They can’t do any deed which would make them be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. They can’t die without realizing the fruit of stream-entry.

2Someone who accepts these principles after considering them with a degree of wisdom is called a follower of the teachings. They’ve arrived at inevitability regarding the right path, they’ve arrived at the level of the good person, and they’ve transcended the level of the bad person. They can’t do any deed which would make them be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. They can’t die without realizing the fruit of stream-entry.

Someone who understands and sees these principles is called a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ vipariṇāmi aññathābhāvi; vedanā aniccā vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī; saññā … saṅkhārā aniccā vipariṇāmino aññathābhāvino; viññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmi aññathābhāvi.

Yo, bhikkhave, ime dhamme evaṁ saddahati adhimuccati, ayaṁ vuccati saddhānusārī, okkanto sammattaniyāmaṁ, sappurisabhūmiṁ okkanto, vītivatto puthujjanabhūmiṁ; abhabbo taṁ kammaṁ kātuṁ, yaṁ kammaṁ katvā nirayaṁ vā tiracchānayoniṁ vā pettivisayaṁ vā upapajjeyya; abhabbo ca tāva kālaṁ kātuṁ yāva na sotāpattiphalaṁ sacchikaroti.

2Yassa kho, bhikkhave, ime dhammā evaṁ paññāya mattaso nijjhanaṁ khamanti, ayaṁ vuccati: ‘dhammānusārī, okkanto sammattaniyāmaṁ, sappurisabhūmiṁ okkanto, vītivatto puthujjanabhūmiṁ; abhabbo taṁ kammaṁ kātuṁ, yaṁ kammaṁ katvā nirayaṁ vā tiracchānayoniṁ vā pettivisayaṁ vā upapajjeyya; abhabbo ca tāva kālaṁ kātuṁ yāva na sotāpattiphalaṁ sacchikaroti’.

Yo, bhikkhave, ime dhamme evaṁ pajānāti evaṁ passati, ayaṁ vuccati: ‘sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano’"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Cakkhuvaggo paṭhamo.

3Cakkhu rūpañca viññāṇaṁ,  
phasso ca vedanāya ca;  
Saññā ca cetanā taṇhā,  
dhātu khandhena te dasāti.

Okkantasaṁyuttaṁ samattaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn25.10-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 227 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN70]], [[MN22]], [[SN48.12]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN25]]  / 🌐 [[SN25.10]]
> ◄  [[sn25.9-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
