---
sutta_code: "SN36.12"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamaākāsasutta "
  - "The Sky (1)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.12]]
> ◄  [[sn36.11-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn36.13-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### II. In Private — SN36.12: In the Sky (1st)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, various winds blow in the sky. Winds blow from the east, the west, the north, and the south. There are winds that are dusty and dustless, cool and warm, weak and strong.

In the same way, various feelings arise in this body: pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings.


2There are many and various  
winds that blow in the sky.  
From the east they come, also the west,  
the north, and then the south.

3They are dusty and dustless,  
cool and sometimes warm,  
strong and weak;  
these are the different breezes that blow.

4So too, in this body  
feelings arise,  
pleasant and painful,  
and those that are neutral.

5But when a bhikkhu is keen,  
not neglecting situational awareness,  
that astute person  
understands all feelings.

6Completely understanding feelings,  
they’re without defilements in this very life.  
That knowledge-master is grounded in the teaching;  
when their body breaks up, they can’t be reckoned.”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ākāse vividhā vātā vāyanti. Puratthimāpi vātā vāyanti, pacchimāpi vātā vāyanti, uttarāpi vātā vāyanti, dakkhiṇāpi vātā vāyanti, sarajāpi vātā vāyanti, arajāpi vātā vāyanti, sītāpi vātā vāyanti, uṇhāpi vātā vāyanti, parittāpi vātā vāyanti, adhimattāpi vātā vāyanti.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, imasmiṁ kāyasmiṁ vividhā vedanā uppajjanti, sukhāpi vedanā uppajjati, dukkhāpi vedanā uppajjati, adukkhamasukhāpi vedanā uppajjatīti.


2Yathāpi vātā ākāse,  
vāyanti vividhā puthū;  
Puratthimā pacchimā cāpi,  
uttarā atha dakkhiṇā.

3Sarajā arajā capi,  
sītā uṇhā ca ekadā;  
Adhimattā parittā ca,  
puthū vāyanti mālutā.

4Tathevimasmiṁ kāyasmiṁ,  
samuppajjanti vedanā;  
Sukhadukkhasamuppatti,  
adukkhamasukhā ca yā.

5Yato ca bhikkhu ātāpī,  
sampajaññaṁ na riñcati;  
Tato so vedanā sabbā,  
parijānāti paṇḍito.

6So vedanā pariññāya,  
diṭṭhe dhamme anāsavo;  
Kāyassa bhedā dhammaṭṭho,  
saṅkhyaṁ nopeti vedagū"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA471]] | S iv 218 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA471]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.12]]
> ◄  [[sn36.11-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn36.13-pali-sc]] ►
