---
sutta_code: "SN36.18"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - "A Number of Bhikkhus"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.18]]
> ◄  [[sn36.17-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn36.19-pali-sc]] ►

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### II. In Private — SN36.18: With Several bhikkhus (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


1Then several bhikkhus went up to the Buddha … The Buddha said to them:

“bhikkhus, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?”

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”


“bhikkhus, there are these three feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral. These are called feeling. …”

This should be told in full as in the previous discourse.

Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavā etadavoca:

“katamā nu kho, bhikkhave, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṁ nissaraṇan”ti?

“Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe …”


“tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā — sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā — imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, vedanā … pe … phassasamudayā … pe ….

Yathā purimasuttante, tathā vitthāretabbo.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SA476]] | S iv 222 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN36.11]], [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SN36.15]], [[SN36.16]], [[SN36.17]], [[SN36.1]], [[SA476]], [[SN36.23]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN36.11]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.18]]
> ◄  [[sn36.17-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn36.19-pali-sc]] ►
