---
sutta_code: "SN36.31"
sutta_title:
  - "Nirāmisasutta "
  - "Spiritual"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.31]]
> ◄  [[sn36.30-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### III. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight — SN36.31: Spiritual
#### B. Sujato


1“Mendicants, there is material rapture, spiritual rapture, and even more spiritual rapture.

There is material pleasure, spiritual pleasure, and even more spiritual pleasure.

There is material equanimity, spiritual equanimity, and even more spiritual equanimity.

There is material liberation, spiritual liberation, and even more spiritual liberation.

And what is material rapture? There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds … Smells … Tastes … Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. The rapture that arises from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called material rapture.


2And what is spiritual rapture? It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while thinking and considering. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without thinking and considering. This is called spiritual rapture.


3And what is even more spiritual rapture? When a mendicant who has ended the defilements reviews their mind free from greed, hate, and delusion, rapture arises. This is called even more spiritual rapture.

4And what is material pleasure? Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds … Smells … Tastes … Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. The pleasure and happiness that arise from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called material pleasure.

5And what is spiritual pleasure? It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while thinking and considering. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without thinking and considering. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ This is called spiritual pleasure.


6And what is even more spiritual pleasure? When a mendicant who has ended the defilements reviews their mind free from greed, hate, and delusion, pleasure and happiness arises. This is called even more spiritual pleasure.

7And what is material equanimity? There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds … Smells … Tastes … Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. The equanimity that arises from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called material equanimity.

8And what is spiritual equanimity? It’s when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called spiritual equanimity.

9And what is even more spiritual equanimity? When a mendicant who has ended the defilements reviews their mind free from greed, hate, and delusion, equanimity arises. This is called even more spiritual equanimity.


10And what is material liberation? Liberation connected with form is material.

11And what is spiritual liberation? Liberation connected with the formless is spiritual.

12And what is even more spiritual liberation? When a mendicant who has ended the defilements reviews their mind free from greed, hate, and delusion, liberation arises. This is called even more spiritual liberation.”


1"Atthi, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti, atthi nirāmisā pīti, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti;

atthi sāmisaṁ sukhaṁ, atthi nirāmisaṁ sukhaṁ, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisataraṁ sukhaṁ;

atthi sāmisā upekkhā, atthi nirāmisā upekkhā, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā;

atthi sāmiso vimokkho, atthi nirāmiso vimokkho, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti? Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. Katame pañca? Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā … pe … kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. Yā kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati pīti, ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti.


2Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā pīti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṁ savicāraṁ vivekajaṁ pītisukhaṁ paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā pīti.


3Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti? Yā kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato uppajjati pīti, ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti.

4Katamañca, bhikkhave, sāmisaṁ sukhaṁ? Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. Katame pañca? Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā … pe … kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṁ somanassaṁ, idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisaṁ sukhaṁ.

5Katamañca, bhikkhave, nirāmisaṁ sukhaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṁ savicāraṁ vivekajaṁ pītisukhaṁ paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca vihārati sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṁvedeti, yaṁ taṁ ariyā ācikkhanti: ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisaṁ sukhaṁ.


6Katamañca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataraṁ sukhaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato uppajjati sukhaṁ somanassaṁ, idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataraṁ sukhaṁ.

7Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sāmisā upekkhā? Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. Katame pañca? Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā … pe … kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. Yā kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati upekkhā, ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisā upekkhā.

8Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā upekkhā? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā, dukkhassa ca pahānā, pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṁ atthaṅgamā, adukkhamasukhaṁ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā upekkhā.

9Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā? Yā kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato uppajjati upekkhā, ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā.


10Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sāmiso vimokkho? Rūpappaṭisaṁyutto vimokkho sāmiso vimokkho.

11Katamo ca, bhikkhave, nirāmiso vimokkho? Arūpappaṭisaṁyutto vimokkho nirāmiso vimokkho.

12Katamo ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho? Yo kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṁ vimuttaṁ paccavekkhato uppajjati vimokkho, ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho"ti.


Ekādasamaṁ.  
Aṭṭhasatapariyāyavaggo tatiyo.

13Sīvakaaṭṭhasataṁ bhikkhu,  
pubbe ñāṇañca bhikkhunā;  
Samaṇabrāhmaṇā tīṇi,  
suddhikañca nirāmisanti.

Vedanāsaṁyuttaṁ samattaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.31-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA483]] | S iv 235 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA483]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN36.19.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.31]]
> ◄  [[sn36.30-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►
