---
sutta_code: "SN36.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhisutta "
  - "Concentration"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn36.2-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

#### Links
---
Sutta Overview: [[Clean Files 3/bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN35-44/SN36/SN36.1]] 
Adjacent Suttas: [[Clean Files 3/Sujato-pali/sn_sujatopali/SN35-44/sn36/sn36.2-sujato-pali]]

---

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### I. With Verses — SN36.1: Immersion
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are these three feelings. What three?

Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings.

2With immersion and situational awareness,  
a mindful disciple of the Buddha  
understands feelings,  
the cause of feelings,

3where they cease,  
and the path that leads to their ending.  
With the ending of feelings, a bhikkhu  
is hungerless, extinguished.”

1"Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā. Katamā tisso?

Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā – imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso vedanāti.

2Samāhito sampajāno,  
sato buddhassa sāvako;  
Vedanā ca pajānāti,  
vedanānañca sambhavaṁ.

3Yattha cetā nirujjhanti,  
maggañca khayagāminaṁ;  
Vedanānaṁ khayā bhikkhu,  
nicchāto parinibbuto"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.

[[sn36#content]][[Clean Files 3/bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN35-44/SN36/SN36.2#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA473]], [[SA474]] | S iv 204 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[ITI52]], [[ITI54]], [[ITI56]], [[SA473]], [[SN36.11]], [[SA474]], [[SN36.15]], [[SN36.16]], [[SN36.17]], [[SN36.18]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN36.22]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn36.2-pali-sc]] ►
