---
sutta_code: "SN36.24"
sutta_title:
  - "Pubbasutta "
  - "Before"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.24]]
> ◄  [[sn36.23-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn36.25-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### III. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight — SN36.24: Before
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, before my awakening — when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening — I thought: ‘What is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?’

Then it occurred to me: ‘There are these three feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral. These are called feeling. Feeling originates from contact. Craving is the practice that leads to the origin of feeling … Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape.’”

1"Pubbeva me, bhikkhave, sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato etadahosi: ‘katamā nu kho vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṁ nissaraṇan’ti?

Tassa mayhaṁ, bhikkhave, etadahosi: ‘tisso imā vedanā – sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā. Imā vuccanti vedanā. Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo. Taṇhā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā … pe … yo vedanāya chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṁ. Idaṁ vedanāya nissaraṇan’"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA475]] | S iv 233 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA475]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN13]], [[MN137]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.24]]
> ◄  [[sn36.23-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn36.25-pali-sc]] ►
