---
sutta_code: "SN36.10"
sutta_title:
  - "Phassamūlakasutta "
  - "Rooted in Contact"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.10]]
> ◄  [[sn36.9-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn36.11-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### I. With Verses — SN36.10: Rooted in Contact
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, these three feelings are born, rooted, sourced, and conditioned by contact. What three?

Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling.

Pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as pleasant, the corresponding pleasant feeling ceases and stops.

Painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful. With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as painful, the corresponding painful feeling ceases and stops.

Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral. With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops.


When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any corresponding heat ceases and stops.

In the same way, these three feelings are born, rooted, sourced, and conditioned by contact. The appropriate feeling arises dependent on the corresponding contact. When the corresponding contact ceases, the appropriate feeling ceases.”


1"Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā phassajā phassamūlakā phassanidānā phassapaccayā. Katamā tisso?

Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā.

Sukhavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati sukhā vedanā. Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā, yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ sukhavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppannā sukhā vedanā, sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati.

Dukkhavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. Tasseva dukkhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā, yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ dukkhavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppannā dukkhā vedanā, sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati.

Adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. Tasseva adukkhamasukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā, yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppannā adukkhamasukhā vedanā, sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati.


Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dvinnaṁ kaṭṭhānaṁ saṅghaṭṭanasamodhānā usmā jāyati, tejo abhinibbattati. Tesaṁyeva kaṭṭhānaṁ nānābhāvā vinikkhepā, yā tajjā usmā, sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, imā tisso vedanā phassajā phassamūlakā phassanidānā phassapaccayā. Tajjaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca tajjā vedanā uppajjanti. Tajjassa phassassa nirodhā tajjā vedanā nirujjhantī"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Vedanāsaṁyuttassa sagāthāvaggo paṭhamo.

2Samādhi sukhaṁ pahānena,  
pātālaṁ daṭṭhabbena ca;  
Sallena ceva gelaññā,  
anicca phassamūlakāti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.10-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA466]] | S iv 215 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA466]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.10]]
> ◄  [[sn36.9-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn36.11-pali-sc]] ►
