---
sutta_code: "MN24"
sutta_pts: "M i 145"
sutta_title:
  - "Rathavinīta Sutta "
  - "Prepared Chariots"
nikaya:
  - "MN "
  - "Majjhima Nikāya"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MN21-30"
  - "Opammavagga"
  - "Similes"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Spirituality"
  - "Noble Path"
sutta_topic:
  - "Skillful qualities"
  - "Purification stages"
sutta_training:
  - "Paññā"
sutta_stage:
  - "Final"
sutta_method:
  - "qa"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
sutta_prominence:
  - ""
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Sariputta"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[EA39.10]]; [[MA9]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[EA39.10]], [[MA9]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN23]]  🌐 [[MN25]] ►

# MN24 - Rathavinīta Sutta - Prepared Chariots
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> Venerable Sāriputta seeks a dialog with an esteemed monk, venerable puṇṇa mantāniputta, and they discuss the stages of purification
Using the simile of a set of relay chariots, ven. Punna mantaniputta explains the relationship of the factors of the path to the goal of the holy life

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Puṇṇa mantāṇiputta is fortunate, so very fortunate,in that his sensible spiritual companions praise him point by point in the presence of the teacher, and that the teacher seconds that appreciation.
The spiritual life is lived under the Buddha  for the sake of nibbana by not grasping. This is the base of Buddha ghosa's visuddhimagga (the path of purity), the cornerstone of his pali commentaries
> 
> Personally having few wishes, they speak to the bhikkhus on having few wishes. Personally having contentment, seclusion, aloofness, energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom, they speak to the bhikkhus on all these things. 
Purification of ethics is only for the sake of purification of mind,  is only for the sake of purification of view,  is only for the sake of purification through overcoming doubt, is only for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision of the variety of paths, is only for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision of the practice, is only for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision  is only for the sake of extinguishment by not grasping.
> 

> [!info] Similes
> Use 7 chariots to travel from one city to another like the stages of purification

---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA39.10]]; [[MA9]] | M i 145 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA39.10]], [[MA9]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.69]], [[SNP4.9]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN24%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMN24%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN24%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN24%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Amn24-%20-file%3A%22MN23%22%20-file%3A%22MN25%22%20-file%3A%22MN24%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/mn24/en/sujato
> - Dhamma Gift: https://dhamma.gift/read/?q=mn24
> - The Buddhas Words: https://thebuddhaswords.net/mn/mn24.html


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN23]]  🌐 [[MN25]] ►
