---
sutta_code: "MN28"
sutta_pts: "M i 184"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahāhatthipadopama Sutta "
  - "Longer Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint"
nikaya:
  - "MN "
  - "Majjhima Nikāya"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MN21-30"
  - "Opammavagga"
  - "Similes"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Noble Truths"
  - "Elements"
  - "Dhamma"
  - "Equanimity"
  - "Spirituality"
  - "Clinging"
sutta_topic:
  - "Suffering Truth"
  - "Impermanence"
  - "Suffering"
  - "Not me"
  - "Dependent origination"
  - "Recollections"
  - "Skillful qualities"
  - "Suffering origin"
sutta_training:
  - "Paññā"
  - "Samādhi"
sutta_stage:
  - "Final"
sutta_method:
  - "Similes"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Sariputta"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[MA30]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[MA30]], [[MN21]], [[MN28]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN27]]  🌐 [[MN29]] ►

# MN28 - Mahāhatthipadopama Sutta - Longer Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> Sāriputta gives an elaborate demonstration of how, just as any footprint can fit inside an elephant’s, all the Buddha ’s teaching can fit inside the four noble truths. This offers an overall template for organizing the Buddha ’s teachings
An explanation of the four noble truths, focusing on the aggregate of physical form and showing (1) how all the aggregates are interrelated and (2) how all four noble truths, together with the principle of dependent co-arising, are related to the aggregate

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Noble truth of suffering: ebirth, old age, death,  sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and not getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering
The interior elements and the exterior elements are just the elements. This Should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘this is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self
This painful feeling born of ear contact has arisen in me. 
That’s dependent, not independent. Dependent On contact. They See that contact, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are impermanent.       One who sees dependent origination sees the teaching. 
One who sees the teaching sees dependent origination
While recollecting the Buddha , the teaching, and the saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful does become stabilized in them, they’re happy with that
All skillful qualities can be included in the four noble truths
 these five grasping aggregates are indeed dependently originated. 
The desire, adherence, attraction, and attachment for these five grasping aggregates is the origin of suffering
> 
> These five grasping aggregates are indeed dependently originated. The Desire, adherence, attraction, and attachment for these five grasping aggregates is the origin of suffering. Giving Up and getting rid of desire and greed for these five grasping aggregates is the cessation of suffering.
Anything hard, solid, and organic that’s internal earth element; anything that’s water, watery, and organic that’s internal water element; anything that’s fire, fiery, and organic that’s internal; anything that’s wind, windy, and organic that’s internal; when a space is enclosed by bones, sinews, flesh, and skin it becomes known as a ‘form’
When the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body or mind is intact internally and exterior sights come into range and there is corresponding engagement, there is the manifestation of the corresponding type of consciousness. The feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness produced in this way are each included in the corresponding grasping aggregate.
If others abuse, attack, harass, and trouble that bhikkhu, they understand: ‘this painful feeling born of ear contact has arisen in me. That’s Dependent on contact that is impermanence so based on that element alone, their mind becomes eager, confident so gladly now, let fists, stones, sticks, and swords strike this body! For this is how the instructions of the Buddha s are followed.’
My energy shall be roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness established and lucid, my body tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind immersed in samādhi
Giving up and getting rid of desire and greed for these five grasping aggregates is the cessation of suffering
> 

> [!info] Similes
> Elephant footprint as 4 Noble Truths 
wife feels ashamed with new family in-law, like sense of urgency 
simile of the saw
simil of the saw

---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn28-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA30]] | M i 184 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA30]], [[MN21]], [[MN28]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN21]], [[MA193]], [[MA8]], [[AN7.62]], [[AN5.197]], [[SN22.5]], [[SN4.9]], [[MA31]], [[MN141]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN28%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMN28%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN28%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN28%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Amn28-%20-file%3A%22MN27%22%20-file%3A%22MN29%22%20-file%3A%22MN28%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/mn28/en/sujato
> - Dhamma Gift: https://dhamma.gift/read/?q=mn28
> - The Buddhas Words: https://thebuddhaswords.net/mn/mn28.html


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN27]]  🌐 [[MN29]] ►
