---
sutta_code: "SN45.7"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyaaññatarabhikkhusutta "
  - "A Certain Bhikkhu (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.7]]
> ◄  [[sn45.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.8-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### I. Ignorance — SN45.7: A bhikkhu (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha … and said to him:


2“Sir, they speak of ‘the removal of greed, hate, and delusion’. What is this a term for?”

“bhikkhu, the removal of greed, hate, and delusion is a term for the natural principle of extinguishment. It’s used to speak of the ending of defilements.”


3When he said this, the bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, they speak of ‘the deathless’. What is the deathless? And what is the path that leads to the deathless?”

“The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is called the deathless. The path that leads to the deathless is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 


2"‘Rāgavinayo dosavinayo mohavinayo’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kissa nu kho etaṁ, bhante, adhivacanaṁ: ‘rāgavinayo dosavinayo mohavinayo’"ti?

"Nibbānadhātuyā kho etaṁ, bhikkhu, adhivacanaṁ: ‘rāgavinayo dosavinayo mohavinayo’ti. Āsavānaṁ khayo tena vuccatī"ti.


3Evaṁ vutte, so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"‘amataṁ, amatan’ti, bhante, vuccati. Katamaṁ nu kho, bhante, amataṁ, katamo amatagāmimaggo"ti?

"Yo kho, bhikkhu, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo – idaṁ vuccati amataṁ. Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo amatagāmimaggo, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhī"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.7-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA753]] | S v 8 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA753]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.7]]
> ◄  [[sn45.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.8-sujato-pali]] ►
