---
sutta_code: "SN45.33"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.33]]
> ◄  [[sn45.32-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.34-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### IV. Practice — SN45.33: Missed Out
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, whoever has missed out on the noble eightfold path has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. Whoever has undertaken the noble eightfold path has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.

And what is the noble eightfold path? It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

Whoever has missed out on the noble eightfold path has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. Whoever has undertaken the noble eightfold path has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo viraddho, viraddho tesaṁ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo āraddho, āraddho tesaṁ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo? Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, ayaṁ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo viraddho, viraddho tesaṁ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, ayaṁ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo āraddho, āraddho tesaṁ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.33-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.33]]
> ◄  [[sn45.32-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.34-sujato-pali]] ►
