---
sutta_code: "SN45.140"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.140]]
> ◄  [[sn45.139-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.141-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### XI. Abbreviated Texts on Diligence — SN45.140: Footprints
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant’s footprint. So an elephant’s footprint is said to be the biggest of them all. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them. A bhikkhu who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a bhikkhu who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It’s when a bhikkhu develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. … That’s how a bhikkhu who is diligent develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yāni kānici jaṅgalānaṁ pāṇānaṁ padajātāni, sabbāni tāni hatthipade samodhānaṁ gacchanti; hatthipadaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – mahantattena; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci kusalā dhammā, sabbe te appamādamūlakā appamādasamosaraṇā; appamādo tesaṁ dhammānaṁ aggamakkhāyati. Appamattassetaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvessati ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkarissati.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu appamatto ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāveti ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaroti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … pe … sammāsamādhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu appamatto ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāveti ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkarotī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.140-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.140]]
> ◄  [[sn45.139-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.141-sujato-pali]] ►
