---
sutta_code: "SN45.23"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamapaṭipadāsutta "
  - "The Way (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.23]]
> ◄  [[sn45.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.24-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### III. The Wrong Way — SN45.23: Practice (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the wrong practice and the right practice. Listen …

And what’s the wrong practice? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong practice.

And what’s the right practice? It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the right practice.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Micchāpaṭipadāñca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, sammāpaṭipadāñca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipadā? Seyyathidaṁ – micchādiṭṭhi … pe … micchāsamādhi. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipadā.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipadā? Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipadā"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 18 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.23]]
> ◄  [[sn45.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.24-sujato-pali]] ►
