---
sutta_code: "SN45.39"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.39]]
> ◄  [[sn45.38-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.40-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### IV. Practice — SN45.39: The Spiritual Path (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the spiritual path and the fruits of the spiritual path. Listen …

And what is the spiritual path? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the spiritual path.

And what are the fruits of the spiritual path? The fruits of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called the fruits of the spiritual path.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Brahmacariyañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, brahmacariyaphalāni ca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṁ? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṁ.

Katamāni ca, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaphalāni? Sotāpattiphalaṁ, sakadāgāmiphalaṁ, anāgāmiphalaṁ, arahattaphalaṁ – imāni vuccanti, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaphalānī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.39-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.39]]
> ◄  [[sn45.38-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.40-sujato-pali]] ►
