---
sutta_code: "SN45.6"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamaaññatarabhikkhusutta "
  - "A Certain Bhikkhu (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.6]]
> ◄  [[sn45.5-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.7-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### I. Ignorance — SN45.6: A bhikkhu (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha … and asked him:

“Sir, they speak of this thing called the ‘spiritual path’. What is the spiritual path? And what is the culmination of the spiritual path?”


2“bhikkhu, the spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is the culmination of the spiritual path.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"‘Brahmacariyaṁ, brahmacariyan’ti, bhante, vuccati. Katamaṁ nu kho, bhante, brahmacariyaṁ, katamaṁ brahmacariyapariyosānan"ti?


2"Ayameva kho, bhikkhu, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo brahmacariyaṁ, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Yo kho, bhikkhu, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo – idaṁ brahmacariyapariyosānan"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 7 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.6]]
> ◄  [[sn45.5-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.7-sujato-pali]] ►
