---
sutta_code: "SN45.176"
sutta_title:
  - "Kāmaguṇasutta "
  - "Cords of Sensual Pleasure"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.176]]
> ◄  [[sn45.175-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.177-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### XIV. Floods — SN45.176: Kinds of Sensual Stimulation
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear … Smells known by the nose … Tastes known by the tongue … Touches known by the body that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five kinds of sensual stimulation.”

1"Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. Katame pañca? Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā, sotaviññeyyā saddā … pe … ghānaviññeyyā gandhā … pe … jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā – ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ kāmaguṇānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya … pe … ayaṁ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.176-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.176]]
> ◄  [[sn45.175-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.177-sujato-pali]] ►
