---
sutta_code: "SN45.28"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhisutta "
  - "Concentration"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.28]]
> ◄  [[sn45.27-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.29-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### III. The Wrong Way — SN45.28: Immersion
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its prerequisites. Listen …

And what is noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its prerequisites? There are right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness.

Unification of mind with these seven factors as prerequisites is called noble right immersion ‘with its vital conditions’ and ‘with its prerequisites’.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Ariyaṁ vo, bhikkhave, sammāsamādhiṁ desessāmi saupanisaṁ saparikkhāraṁ. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, ariyo sammāsamādhi saupaniso saparikkhāro? Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsati.

Yā kho, bhikkhave, imehi sattahaṅgehi cittassa ekaggatā saparikkhāratā – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyo sammāsamādhi saupaniso itipi saparikkhāro itipī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.28-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 21 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.28]]
> ◄  [[sn45.27-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.29-sujato-pali]] ►
