---
sutta_code: "SN45.37"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.37]]
> ◄  [[sn45.36-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.38-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### IV. Practice — SN45.37: The Brahmin Life (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you life as a brahmin and the fruits of life as a brahmin. Listen …

And what is life as a brahmin? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called life as a brahmin.

And what are the fruits of life as a brahmin? The fruits of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called the fruits of life as a brahmin.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Brahmaññañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, brahmaññaphalāni ca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamañca kho, bhikkhave, brahmaññaṁ? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, brahmaññaṁ.

Katamāni ca, bhikkhave, brahmaññaphalāni? Sotāpattiphalaṁ, sakadāgāmiphalaṁ, anāgāmiphalaṁ, arahattaphalaṁ – imāni vuccanti, bhikkhave, brahmaññaphalānī"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.37-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.37]]
> ◄  [[sn45.36-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.38-sujato-pali]] ►
