---
sutta_code: "SN45.49"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.49]]
> ◄  [[sn45.48-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.50-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### VI. Abbreviated Texts on the Sun — SN45.49: Good Friends (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In the same way good friendship is the forerunner and precursor of the noble eightfold path for a bhikkhu. A bhikkhu with good friends can expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a bhikkhu with good friends develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It’s when a bhikkhu develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how a bhikkhu with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Sūriyassa, bhikkhave, udayato etaṁ pubbaṅgamaṁ etaṁ pubbanimittaṁ, yadidaṁ – aruṇuggaṁ; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ariyassa aṭṭhaṅgikassa maggassa uppādāya etaṁ pubbaṅgamaṁ etaṁ pubbanimittaṁ, yadidaṁ – kalyāṇamittatā. Kalyāṇamittassetaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvessati, ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkarissati.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāveti, ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaroti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … pe … sammāsamādhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāveti, ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkarotī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.49-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.49]]
> ◄  [[sn45.48-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.50-sujato-pali]] ►
