---
sutta_code: "SN45.152"
sutta_title:
  - "Rukkhasutta "
  - "The Tree"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.152]]
> ◄  [[sn45.151-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.153-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On thePath

### XII. Hard Work — SN45.152: Trees
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, suppose a tree slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. If it was cut off at the root, where would it fall?”

“Sir, it would fall in the direction that it slants, slopes, and inclines.”

“In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a bhikkhu who develops the noble eightfold path slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rukkho pācīnaninno pācīnapoṇo pācīnapabbhāro. So mūlacchinno katamena papateyyā"ti?

"Yena, bhante, ninno yena poṇo yena pabbhāro"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … pe … sammāsamādhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.152-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.152]]
> ◄  [[sn45.151-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.153-sujato-pali]] ►
