---
sutta_code: "SN45.121"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.121]]
> ◄  [[sn45.116-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.122-sujato-pali]] ►

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### X. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges — SN45.121: Slanting to the Ocean
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean. In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a bhikkhu who develops the noble eightfold path slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate, finish, and end in the deathless. That’s how a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī samuddaninnā samuddapoṇā samuddapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṁ bhāveti amatogadhaṁ amataparāyanaṁ amatapariyosānaṁ … pe … sammāsamādhiṁ bhāveti amatogadhaṁ amataparāyanaṁ amatapariyosānaṁ. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro”ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.

[[sn45.116-120#content]][[sn45.122-126#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.121-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.121]]
> ◄  [[sn45.116-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.122-sujato-pali]] ►
