---
sutta_code: "SN45.24"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyapaṭipadāsutta "
  - "The Way (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.24]]
> ◄  [[sn45.23-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.25-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### III. The Wrong Way — SN45.24: Practice (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I don’t praise wrong practice for laypeople or renunciates. Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in the procedure of the skillful teaching.

2And what’s the wrong practice? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong practice. I don’t praise wrong practice for lay people or renunciates. Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in the procedure of the skillful teaching.

3I praise right practice for laypeople and renunciates. Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the procedure of the skillful teaching. And what’s the right practice? It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the right practice. I praise right practice for laypeople and renunciates.

Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the procedure of the skillful teaching.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Gihino vāhaṁ, bhikkhave, pabbajitassa vā micchāpaṭipadāṁ na vaṇṇemi. Gihi vā, bhikkhave, pabbajito vā micchāpaṭipanno micchāpaṭipattādhikaraṇahetu nārādhako hoti ñāyaṁ dhammaṁ kusalaṁ.

2Katamā ca, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipadā? Seyyathidaṁ – micchādiṭṭhi … pe … micchāsamādhi. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipadā. Gihino vāhaṁ, bhikkhave, pabbajitassa vā micchāpaṭipadāṁ na vaṇṇemi. Gihi vā, bhikkhave, pabbajito vā micchāpaṭipanno micchāpaṭipattādhikaraṇahetu nārādhako hoti ñāyaṁ dhammaṁ kusalaṁ.

3Gihino vāhaṁ, bhikkhave, pabbajitassa vā sammāpaṭipadāṁ vaṇṇemi. Gihi vā, bhikkhave, pabbajito vā sammāpaṭipanno sammāpaṭipattādhikaraṇahetu ārādhako hoti ñāyaṁ dhammaṁ kusalaṁ. Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipadā? Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipadā. Gihino vāhaṁ, bhikkhave, pabbajitassa vā sammāpaṭipadāṁ vaṇṇemi.

Gihi vā, bhikkhave, pabbajito vā sammāpaṭipanno sammāpaṭipattādhikaraṇahetu ārādhako hoti ñāyaṁ dhammaṁ kusalan"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA751]] | S v 18 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA751]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.24]]
> ◄  [[sn45.23-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.25-sujato-pali]] ►
