---
sutta_code: "SN45.40"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.40]]
> ◄  [[sn45.39-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.41-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### IV. Practice — SN45.40: The Spiritual Path (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the spiritual path and the goal of the spiritual path. Listen …

And what is the spiritual path? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the spiritual path.


And what is the goal of the spiritual path? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is called the goal of the spiritual path.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Brahmacariyañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, brahmacariyatthañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṁ? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṁ.


Katamo ca, bhikkhave, brahmacariyattho? Yo kho, bhikkhave, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, brahmacariyattho"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Paṭipattivaggo catuttho.

2Paṭipatti paṭipanno ca,  
viraddhañca pāraṅgamā;  
Sāmaññena ca dve vuttā,  
brahmaññā apare duve;  
Brahmacariyena dve vuttā,  
vaggo tena pavuccatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.40-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.40]]
> ◄  [[sn45.39-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.41-sujato-pali]] ►
