---
sutta_code: "SN45.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Sāriputtasutta "
  - "Sāriputta"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.3]]
> ◄  [[sn45.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### I. Ignorance — SN45.3: Sāriputta
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Sir, good friends, companions, and associates are the whole of the spiritual life.”


2“Good, good, Sāriputta! Good friends, companions, and associates are the whole of the spiritual life. A bhikkhu with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a bhikkhu with good friends develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path?

3It’s when a bhikkhu develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how a bhikkhu with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

4And here’s another way to understand how good friends are the whole of the spiritual life. For, by relying on me as a good friend, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things. This is another way to understand how good friends are the whole of the spiritual life.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"Sakalamidaṁ, bhante, brahmacariyaṁ, yadidaṁ – kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā"ti.


2"Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. Sakalamidaṁ, sāriputta, brahmacariyaṁ, yadidaṁ – kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā. Kalyāṇamittassetaṁ, sāriputta, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṁ kalyāṇasahāyassa kalyāṇasampavaṅkassa – ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvessati, ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkarissati.

Kathañca, sāriputta, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāveti, ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaroti?

3Idha, sāriputta, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … pe … sammāsamādhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ kho, sāriputta, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāveti, ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaroti.

4Tadamināpetaṁ, sāriputta, pariyāyena veditabbaṁ yathā sakalamidaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, yadidaṁ – kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā. Mamañhi, sāriputta, kalyāṇamittaṁ āgamma jātidhammā sattā jātiyā parimuccanti; jarādhammā sattā jarāya parimuccanti; maraṇadhammā sattā maraṇena parimuccanti; sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsadhammā sattā sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsehi parimuccanti. Iminā kho etaṁ, sāriputta, pariyāyena veditabbaṁ yathā sakalamidaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, yadidaṁ – kalyāṇamittatā kalyāṇasahāyatā kalyāṇasampavaṅkatā"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 3 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN95]], [[AN4.192]], [[AN8.54]], [[AN9.1]], [[UD4.1]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.3]]
> ◄  [[sn45.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.4-sujato-pali]] ►
