---
sutta_code: "SN45.35"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.35]]
> ◄  [[sn45.34-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.36-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### IV. Practice — SN45.35: The Ascetic Life (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the ascetic life and the fruits of the ascetic life. Listen …

And what is the ascetic life? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the ascetic life.

And what are the fruits of the ascetic life? The fruits of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called the fruits of the ascetic life.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Sāmaññañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, sāmaññaphalāni ca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, sāmaññaṁ? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmaññaṁ.

Katamāni ca, bhikkhave, sāmaññaphalāni? Sotāpattiphalaṁ, sakadāgāmiphalaṁ, anāgāmiphalaṁ, arahattaphalaṁ – imāni vuccanti, bhikkhave, sāmaññaphalānī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.35-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.35]]
> ◄  [[sn45.34-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.36-sujato-pali]] ►
