---
sutta_code: "SN45.34"
sutta_title:
  - "Pāraṅgama "
  - "Going To The Far Shore"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.34]]
> ◄  [[sn45.33-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.35-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### IV. Practice — SN45.34: Going to the Far Shore
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, when these eight things are developed and cultivated they lead to going from the near shore to the far shore. What eight? They are right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. When these eight things are developed and cultivated they lead to going from the near shore to the far shore.”

2That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:


3“Few are those among humans  
who cross to the far shore.  
The rest just run  
around on the near shore.

4When the teaching is well explained,  
those who practice accordingly  
are the ones who will cross over  
Death’s domain so hard to pass.

5Rid of dark qualities,  
an astute person should develop the bright.  
Leaving home behind  
for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,

6you should try to find delight there,  
having left behind sensual pleasures.  
With no possessions, an astute person  
should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.

7And those whose minds are rightly developed  
in the awakening factors;  
letting go of attachments,  
they delight in not grasping.  
With defilements ended, brilliant,  
they are extinguished in this world.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Aṭṭhime, bhikkhave, dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā apārā pāraṁ gamanāya saṁvattanti. Katame aṭṭha? Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi.

Ime kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭha dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā apārā pāraṁ gamanāya saṁvattantī"ti.

2Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 


3"Appakā te manussesu,  
ye janā pāragāmino;  
Athāyaṁ itarā pajā,  
tīramevānudhāvati.

4Ye ca kho sammadakkhāte,  
dhamme dhammānuvattino;  
Te janā pāramessanti,  
maccudheyyaṁ suduttaraṁ.

5Kaṇhaṁ dhammaṁ vippahāya,  
sukkaṁ bhāvetha paṇḍito;  
Okā anokamāgamma,  
viveke yattha dūramaṁ.

6Tatrābhiratimiccheyya,  
hitvā kāme akiñcano;  
Pariyodapeyya attānaṁ,  
cittaklesehi paṇḍito.

7Yesaṁ sambodhiyaṅgesu,  
sammā cittaṁ subhāvitaṁ;  
Ādānapaṭinissagge,  
anupādāya ye ratā;  
Khīṇāsavā jutimanto,  
te loke parinibbutā"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.34-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA771]] | S v 24 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.117]], [[SA771]], [[DHP\|DHP85]], [[AN10.118]], [[AN10.169]], [[AN10.170]], [[SN46.17]], [[DHP\|DHP86]], [[DHP\|DHP87]], [[DHP\|DHP88]], [[DHP\|DHP89]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.34]]
> ◄  [[sn45.33-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.35-sujato-pali]] ►
