---
sutta_code: "SN45.12"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyavihārasutta "
  - "Dwelling (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.12]]
> ◄  [[sn45.11-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.13-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### II. Meditation — SN45.12: Meditation (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I wish to go on retreat for three months. No-one should approach me, except for the one who brings my alms-food.”

“Yes, sir,” replied those bhikkhus. And no-one approached him, except for the one who brought the alms-food.


2Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed the bhikkhus:

“bhikkhus, I’ve been practicing part of the meditation I practiced when I was first awakened.

I understand that there’s feeling conditioned by wrong view and by the stilling of wrong view, by right view and by the stilling of right view. … There’s feeling conditioned by wrong immersion and by the stilling of wrong immersion, by right immersion and by the stilling of right immersion. There’s feeling conditioned by desire and by the stilling of desire, by thought and by the stilling of thought, by perception and by the stilling of perception. As long as desire, thought, and perception are not stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that. When desire, thought, and perception are stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that. There is effort to attain the unattained. When that state has been attained, there is also feeling conditioned by that.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Icchāmahaṁ, bhikkhave, temāsaṁ paṭisallīyituṁ. Namhi kenaci upasaṅkamitabbo, aññatra ekena piṇḍapātanīhārakenā"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paṭissutvā nāssudha koci bhagavantaṁ upasaṅkamati, aññatra ekena piṇḍapātanīhārakena.


2Atha kho bhagavā tassa temāsassa accayena paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito bhikkhū āmantesi:

"Yena svāhaṁ, bhikkhave, vihārena paṭhamābhisambuddho viharāmi, tassa padesena vihāsiṁ.

So evaṁ pajānāmi: ‘micchādiṭṭhipaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; micchādiṭṭhivūpasamapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; sammādiṭṭhipaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; sammādiṭṭhivūpasamapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ … pe … micchāsamādhipaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; micchāsamādhivūpasamapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ, sammāsamādhipaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; sammāsamādhivūpasamapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; chandapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; chandavūpasamapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; vitakkapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; vitakkavūpasamapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; saññāpaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; saññāvūpasamapaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; chando ca avūpasanto hoti, vitakko ca avūpasanto hoti, saññā ca avūpasantā hoti, tappaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; chando ca vūpasanto hoti, vitakko ca vūpasanto hoti, saññā ca vūpasantā hoti, tappaccayāpi vedayitaṁ; appattassa pattiyā atthi āyāmaṁ, tasmimpi ṭhāne anuppatte tappaccayāpi vedayitan’"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 13 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.12]]
> ◄  [[sn45.11-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.13-sujato-pali]] ►
