---
sutta_code: "SN45.21"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchattasutta "
  - "Wrongness"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.21]]
> ◄  [[sn45.20-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.22-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### III. The Wrong Way — SN45.21: The Wrong Way
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the wrong way and the right way. Listen …

And what is the wrong way? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong way.

And what is the right way? It is right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the right way.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Micchattañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, sammattañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, micchattaṁ? Seyyathidaṁ – micchādiṭṭhi … pe … micchāsamādhi. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, micchattaṁ.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, sammattaṁ? Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammattan"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.21-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA770]], [[SA784]] | S v 17 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA770]], [[SA784]], [[SN45.8]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.21]]
> ◄  [[sn45.20-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.22-sujato-pali]] ►
