---
sutta_code: "SN45.96"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.96]]
> ◄  [[sn45.92-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.97-sujato-pali]] ►

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### IX. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges — SN45.96: Sixth Discourse on Slanting East
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, all the great rivers — that is, the Ganges, Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī — slant, slope, and incline towards the east. In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a bhikkhu who develops the noble eightfold path slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

“Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yā kācimā mahānadiyo, seyyathidaṁ — gaṅgā, yamunā, aciravatī, sarabhū, mahī, sabbā tā pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ … pe … sammāsamādhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bhāvento ariyaṁ aṭṭhaṅgikaṁ maggaṁ bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro”ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.

[[sn45.92-95#content]][[sn45.97#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.96-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.96]]
> ◄  [[sn45.92-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.97-sujato-pali]] ►
