---
sutta_code: "SN45.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Sūkasutta "
  - "The Spike"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.9]]
> ◄  [[sn45.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.10-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### I. Ignorance — SN45.9: A Spike
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the wrong way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, there’s no way it could break the skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is pointing the wrong way.

In the same way, a bhikkhu whose view and development of the path is pointing the wrong way cannot break ignorance, produce knowledge, and realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because their view is pointing the wrong way.

2Suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the right way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it may well break the skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is pointing the right way.

In the same way, a bhikkhu whose view and development of the path is pointing the right way may well break ignorance, produce knowledge, and realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because their view is pointing the right way.

3And how does a bhikkhu whose view and development of the path is pointing the right way break ignorance, give rise to knowledge, and realize extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

That’s how a bhikkhu whose view and development of the path is pointing the right way breaks ignorance, gives rise to knowledge, and realizes extinguishment.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, sālisūkaṁ vā yavasūkaṁ vā micchāpaṇihitaṁ hatthena vā pādena vā akkantaṁ hatthaṁ vā pādaṁ vā bhindissati, lohitaṁ vā uppādessatīti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati. Taṁ kissa hetu? Micchāpaṇihitattā, bhikkhave, sūkassa.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, so vata bhikkhu micchāpaṇihitāya diṭṭhiyā micchāpaṇihitāya maggabhāvanāya avijjāṁ bhindissati, vijjāṁ uppādessati, nibbānaṁ sacchikarissatīti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati. Taṁ kissa hetu? Micchāpaṇihitattā, bhikkhave, diṭṭhiyā.

2Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, sālisūkaṁ vā yavasūkaṁ vā sammāpaṇihitaṁ hatthena vā pādena vā akkantaṁ hatthaṁ vā pādaṁ vā bhindissati, lohitaṁ vā uppādessatīti – ṭhānametaṁ vijjati. Taṁ kissa hetu? Sammāpaṇihitattā, bhikkhave, sūkassa.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, so vata bhikkhu sammāpaṇihitāya diṭṭhiyā sammāpaṇihitāya maggabhāvanāya avijjāṁ bhindissati, vijjāṁ uppādessati, nibbānaṁ sacchikarissatīti – ṭhānametaṁ vijjati. Taṁ kissa hetu? Sammāpaṇihitattā, bhikkhave, diṭṭhiyā.

3Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammāpaṇihitāya diṭṭhiyā sammāpaṇihitāya maggabhāvanāya avijjāṁ bhindati, vijjāṁ uppādeti, nibbānaṁ sacchikarotīti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … pe … sammāsamādhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammāpaṇihitāya diṭṭhiyā sammāpaṇihitāya maggabhāvanāya avijjāṁ bhindati, vijjāṁ uppādeti, nibbānaṁ sacchikarotī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 10 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.9]]
> ◄  [[sn45.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.10-sujato-pali]] ►
