---
sutta_code: "SN40.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Catutthajhanapañhāsutta "
  - "The Fourth jhāna"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN40]]  / 🌐 [[SN40.4]]
> ◄  [[sn40.3-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn40.5-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 40. Moggallānasaṁyutta: With Moggallāna

### I. By Moggallāna — SN40.4: A Question About the Fourth jhāna
#### B. Sujato


1“They speak of this thing called the ‘fourth jhāna’. What is the fourth jhāna? It occurred to me: ‘It’s when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, a bhikkhu enters and remains in the fourth jhāna, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called the fourth jhāna.’


And so … I was entering and remaining in the fourth jhāna. While I was in that meditation, perceptions and attentions accompanied by pleasure beset me.


2Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, ‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! Don’t neglect the fourth jhāna, brahmin! Settle your mind in the fourth jhāna; unify your mind and immerse it in the fourth jhāna.’

And so, after some time … I entered and remained in the fourth jhāna.


So if anyone should be rightly called a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.”

1"‘Catutthaṁ jhānaṁ, catutthaṁ jhanan’ti vuccati. Katamaṁ nu kho catutthaṁ jhananti?

Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, etadahosi: ‘idha bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṁ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṁ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Idaṁ vuccati catutthaṁ jhanan’ti.


So khvāhaṁ, āvuso, sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṁ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṁ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja viharāmi. Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, iminā vihārena vihārato sukhasahagatā saññāmanasikārā samudācaranti.


2Atha kho maṁ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca: ‘moggallāna, moggallāna. Mā, brāhmaṇa, catutthaṁ jhānaṁ pamādo, catutthe jhāne cittaṁ saṇṭhapehi, catutthe jhāne cittaṁ ekodiṁ karohi, catutthe jhāne cittaṁ samādahā’ti.

So khvāhaṁ, āvuso, aparena samayena sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṁ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṁ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṁ catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihāsiṁ.


Yañhi taṁ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya … pe … mahābhiññataṁ patto"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn40.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 265 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN40]]  / 🌐 [[SN40.4]]
> ◄  [[sn40.3-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn40.5-pali-sc]] ►
