---
sutta_code: "SN53.45"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN53.45]]
> ◄  [[sn53.35-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 53. Jhānasaṁyutta: On jhānas

### V. Floods — SN53.45-54: Floods, Etc.
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five higher fetters.

The four jhānas should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters. What four? It’s when a bhikkhu, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first jhāna, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while thinking and considering. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second jhāna … third jhāna … fourth jhāna. These four jhānas should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.”

To be expanded as in the Linked Discourses on the Path at SN45.171-180.


Floods, bonds, grasping,  
ties, and underlying tendencies,  
kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,  
aggregates, and fetters high and low.

“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, uddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni. Katamāni pañca? Rūparāgo, arūparāgo, māno, uddhaccaṁ, avijjā — imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ uddhambhāgiyānaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya cattāro jhānā bhāvetabbā. Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṁ savicāraṁ vivekajaṁ pītisukhaṁ paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja viharati. Vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ … pe … tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ … pe … catutthaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja viharati. Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ uddhambhāgiyānaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ime cattāro jhānā bhāvetabbā”ti vitthāretabbaṁ.

Yathā maggasaṁyuttaṁ tathā vitthāretabbaṁ.

Oghavaggo pañcamo.

Tassuddānaṁ


Ogho yogo upādānaṁ,  
ganthā anusayena ca;  
Kāmaguṇā nīvaraṇā,  
khandhā oruddhambhāgiyāti.

[[Bodhi epubs/Process/SN Bodhi 3/SN53/SN53.35-44#content]][[sn54#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn53.45-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN53.45]]
> ◄  [[sn53.35-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►
