---
sutta_code: "SN14.23"
sutta_title:
  - "Asamāhitasutta "
  - "Unconcentrated"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.23]]
> ◄  [[sn14.22-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.24-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 14.23 Asamāhitasuttaṃ

## SN 14.23 The Discourse on the Uncollected

107. Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati…pe… ‘‘dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṃsandanti samenti. Assaddhā assaddhehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; ahirikā ahirikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; anottappino anottappīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; asamāhitā asamāhitehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; duppaññā duppaññehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti’’.

107.At Sāvatthī. [...] “Monks, beings come together and unite according to their elements. The faithless associate and unite with the faithless; the shameless associate and unite with the shameless; those lacking moral dread associate and unite with those lacking moral dread; the uncollected associate and unite with the uncollected; the unwise associate and unite with the unwise.”

‘‘Saddhā saddhehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; hirimanā hirimanehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; ottappino ottappīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; samāhitā samāhitehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; paññavanto paññavantehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samentī’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.

“The faithful associate and unite with the faithful; the shame-minded associate and unite with the shame-minded; those with moral dread associate and unite with those with moral dread; the collected associate and unite with the collected; the wise associate and unite with the wise.” The First.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-3.20]], [[SA449]], [[SA450]] | S ii 166 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-3.20]], [[SA450]], [[SN14.17]], [[SN14.18]], [[SN14.19]], [[SN14.20]], [[SN14.21]], [[SN14.22]], [[SN14.24]], [[SN14.25]], [[SN14.26]], [[SN14.27]], [[SN14.28]], [[SN14.29]], [[SN14.12]], [[SA449]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.23]]
> ◄  [[sn14.22-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.24-deepseek-pali]] ►
