---
sutta_code: "SN14.28"
sutta_title:
  - "Aṭṭhaṅgikasutta "
  - "The Eightfold Path"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.28]]
> ◄  [[sn14.27-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.29-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 14.28 Aṭṭhaṅgikasuttaṃ

## SN 14.28 The Eight-Factored Sutta

112. Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati…pe… ‘‘dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṃsandanti samenti. Micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; micchāsaṅkappā…pe… micchāvācā… micchākammantā… micchāājīvā… micchāvāyāmā… micchāsatino … micchāsamādhino micchāsamādhīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti. Sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; sammāsaṅkappā…pe… sammāvācā… sammākammantā… sammāājīvā… sammāvāyāmā… sammāsatino… sammāsamādhino sammāsamādhīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samentī’’ti. Chaṭṭhaṃ.

112.At Sāvatthī… “Monks, beings associate and converge according to their element. Those with wrong view associate and converge with those with wrong view; those with wrong intention… those with wrong speech… those with wrong action… those with wrong livelihood… those with wrong effort… those with wrong mindfulness… those with wrong samādhi associate and converge with those with wrong samādhi. Those with right view associate and converge with those with right view; those with right intention… those with right speech… those with right action… those with right livelihood… those with right effort… those with right mindfulness… those with right samādhi associate and converge with those with right samādhi.” The sixth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.28-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-3.20]], [[SA449]], [[SA450]] | S ii 168 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-3.20]], [[SA450]], [[SN14.17]], [[SN14.18]], [[SN14.19]], [[SN14.20]], [[SN14.21]], [[SN14.22]], [[SN14.23]], [[SN14.24]], [[SN14.25]], [[SN14.26]], [[SN14.27]], [[SN14.29]], [[SN14.12]], [[SA449]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.28]]
> ◄  [[sn14.27-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.29-deepseek-pali]] ►
