---
sutta_code: "SN14.29"
sutta_title:
  - "Dasaṅgasutta "
  - "Ten Factors"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.29]]
> ◄  [[sn14.28-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.30-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 14.29 Dasaṅgasuttaṃ

## SN 14.29 The Ten-Factored Sutta

113. Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati…pe… ‘‘dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṃsandanti samenti. Micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; micchāsaṅkappā…pe… micchāvācā… micchākammantā… micchāājīvā… micchāvāyāmā… micchāsatino … micchāsamādhino micchāsamādhīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; micchāñāṇino micchāñāṇīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; micchāvimuttino micchāvimuttīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti’’.

113.At Sāvatthī… “Monks, beings associate and converge according to their element. Those with wrong view associate and converge with those with wrong view; those with wrong intention… those with wrong speech… those with wrong action… those with wrong livelihood… those with wrong effort… those with wrong mindfulness… those with wrong samādhi associate and converge with those with wrong samādhi; those with wrong knowledge associate and converge with those with wrong knowledge; those with wrong liberation associate and converge with those with wrong liberation.”

‘‘Sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikehi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; sammāsaṅkappā…pe… sammāvācā… sammākammantā… sammāājīvā… sammāvāyāmā… sammāsatino… sammāsamādhino… sammāñāṇino sammāñāṇīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samenti; sammāvimuttino sammāvimuttīhi saddhiṃ saṃsandanti samentī’’ti. Sattamaṃ.

“Those with right view associate and converge with those with right view; those with right intention… those with right speech… those with right action… those with right livelihood… those with right effort… those with right mindfulness… those with right samādhi… those with right knowledge associate and converge with those with right knowledge; those with right liberation associate and converge with those with right liberation.” The seventh.

Sattannaṃ suttantānaṃ uddānaṃ –

Recapitulation of the Seven Suttas:

Asamāhitaṃ dussīlaṃ, pañca sikkhāpadāni ca;Satta kammapathā vuttā, dasakammapathena ca;Chaṭṭhaṃ aṭṭhaṅgiko vutto, dasaṅgena ca sattamaṃ.

The Uncollected, the Immoral, and the Five Precepts;
The seven courses of action are stated, and the ten courses of action;
The sixth is called the Eight-factored, and the seventh the Ten-factored.

Kammapathavaggo tatiyo.

Chapter Three: The Division on Courses of Action.

4. Catutthavaggo

4.The Fourth Section


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.29-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-3.20]], [[SA449]], [[SA450]] | S ii 168 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-3.20]], [[SA450]], [[SN14.17]], [[SN14.18]], [[SN14.19]], [[SN14.20]], [[SN14.21]], [[SN14.22]], [[SN14.23]], [[SN14.24]], [[SN14.25]], [[SN14.26]], [[SN14.27]], [[SN14.28]], [[SN14.12]], [[SA449]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.29]]
> ◄  [[sn14.28-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.30-deepseek-pali]] ►
