---
sutta_code: "MA185"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "牛角婆羅林 "
  - "Discourse in the Gosiṅga Sāla Forest 2"
nikaya:
  - "MA "
  - "Madhyama Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MA181-190"
  - ""
  - "MA 15 Pairs"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Harmony"
  - "Meditation"
sutta_topic:
  - "Practices cordial"
  - "Meditation attainments"
sutta_training:
  - "Samādhi"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
  - "Middle"
sutta_method:
  - "qa"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - ""
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[EA24.8]], [[MA72]]"
parallels_partilal: ""
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA184]]  🌐 [[MA186]] ►

# MA185 - 牛角婆羅林 - Discourse in the Gosiṅga Sāla Forest 2
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> The Buddha  comes across three bhikkhus practicing diligently and harmoniously, and asks them how they do it. Reluctant to disclose their higher attainments, they explain how they deal with the practical affairs of living together. But when pressed by the Buddha , they reveal their meditation attainments.

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Whoever is living in harmony, diligently, keen, and resolute is practicing for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of compassion for the world, because anyone who  recollect those venerables with confident heart, that would be for their lasting welfare and happiness.
Superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a meditation at ease
> 
> consistently treat each other with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private, they put away the seats, drinking water, and rubbish bin, and sweep the refectory. 
If someone sees that the pot of water for washing, drinking, or the toilet is empty they set it up, don't talk except every five days to discuss the teachings.
4 jhanas, 4 divine abodes, 4 formless liberations  and 6 higher knowleges
> 

> [!info] Similes
> Blending milk and water, like living in harmony

---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma185-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA24.8]], [[MA72]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
|  |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN128]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA185%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMA185%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA185%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA185%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Ama185-%20-file%3A%22MA184%22%20-file%3A%22MA186%22%20-file%3A%22MA185%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ma185/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA184]]  🌐 [[MA186]] ►
