---
sutta_code: "MA188"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "阿夷那 "
  - "Ajita"
nikaya:
  - "MA "
  - "Madhyama Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MA181-190"
  - ""
  - "MA 15 Pairs"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Noble path"
sutta_topic:
  - "Path right and wrong"
sutta_training:
  - "Paññā"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
sutta_prominence:
  - ""
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: ""
parallels_partilal: "[[EA24.10]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA187]]  🌐 [[MA189]] ►

# MA188 - 阿夷那 - Ajita
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> One should understand what is the teaching and what is contrary to the teaching. After hearing this in brief from the Buddha, the bhikkhus seek a detailed answer from Ānanda

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Wrong view is non-Dharma, right view is Dharma. Whatever innumerable 
evil and unwholesome states arise in dependence on wrong view, these 
are not beneficial. Whatever innumerable wholesome states arise in depend_x0002_ence on right view, these are beneficial.
> 
> Wrong thought is a bad principle. Right thought is a good principle. … Wrong speech is a bad principle. Right speech is a good principle. … Wrong action is a bad principle. Right action is a good principle. … Wrong livelihood is a bad principle. Right livelihood is a good principle. … Wrong effort is a bad principle. Right effort is a good principle. … Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle. Right mindfulness is a good principle. … Wrong immersion is a bad principle. Right immersion is a good principle. … Wrong knowledge is a bad principle. Right knowledge is a good principle. wrong freedom is a bad principle. Right freedom is a good principle.
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma188-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA24.10]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA188%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMA188%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA188%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA188%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Ama188-%20-file%3A%22MA187%22%20-file%3A%22MA189%22%20-file%3A%22MA188%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ma188/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA187]]  🌐 [[MA189]] ►
