---
sutta_code: "SN24.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Natthidinnasutta "
  - "There Is Not"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN24]]  / 🌐 [[SN24.5]]
> ◄  [[sn24.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn24.6-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 24. Diṭṭhisaṁyutta: On View

### I. Stream-Entry — SN24.5: There’s No Meaning in Giving
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on what, does the view arise: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There are no duties to mother and father. No beings are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is well attained and practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight. This person is made up of the four primary elements. When they die, the earth in their body merges and coalesces with the main mass of earth. The water in their body merges and coalesces with the main mass of water. The fire in their body merges and coalesces with the main mass of fire. The air in their body merges and coalesces with the main mass of air. The faculties are transferred to space. Four men with a bier carry away the corpse. Their footprints show the way to the cemetery. The bones become bleached. Offerings dedicated to the gods end in ashes. Giving is a doctrine of morons. When anyone affirms a positive teaching it’s just baseless, false nonsense. Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated and destroyed when their body breaks up, and don’t exist after death’?”


“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

2“When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the view arises: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. … Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated and destroyed when their body breaks up, and don’t exist after death.’ When feeling … perception … choices … consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. … Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated and destroyed when their body breaks up, and don’t exist after death.’


3What do you think, bhikkhus? Is form permanent or impermanent?”


“Impermanent, sir.” …

“Is feeling … perception … choices … consciousness permanent or impermanent?”


“Impermanent, sir.” …

“That which is seen, heard, thought, known, sought, and explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?”


“Impermanent, sir.” …

“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would such a view arise?”


“No, sir.”

4“When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation, they’re called a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Kismiṁ nu kho, bhikkhave, sati kiṁ upādāya, kiṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘Natthi dinnaṁ, natthi yiṭṭhaṁ, natthi hutaṁ, natthi sukatadukkaṭānaṁ kammānaṁ phalaṁ vipāko; natthi ayaṁ loko, natthi paro loko, natthi mātā, natthi pitā, natthi sattā opapātikā; natthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammāpaṭipannā ye imañca lokaṁ parañca lokaṁ sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedenti. Cātumahābhūtiko ayaṁ puriso yadā kālaṁ karoti pathavī pathavīkāyaṁ anupeti anupagacchati, āpo āpokāyaṁ anupeti anupagacchati, tejo tejokāyaṁ anupeti anupagacchati, vāyo vāyokāyaṁ anupeti anupagacchati. Ākāsaṁ indriyāni saṅkamanti. Āsandipañcamā purisā mataṁ ādāya gacchanti. Yāva āḷāhanā padāni paññāyanti. Kāpotakāni aṭṭhīni bhavanti. Bhassantā āhutiyo. Dattupaññattaṁ yadidaṁ dānaṁ. Tesaṁ tucchaṁ musā vilāpo ye keci atthikavādaṁ vadanti. Bāle ca paṇḍite ca kāyassa bhedā ucchijjanti vinassanti na honti paraṁ maraṇā’"ti?


"Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe …

2"Rūpe kho, bhikkhave, sati, rūpaṁ upādāya, rūpaṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘Natthi dinnaṁ, natthi yiṭṭhaṁ … pe … kāyassa bhedā ucchijjanti vinassanti na honti paraṁ maraṇā’ti. Vedanāya sati … pe … saññāya sati … saṅkhāresu sati … viññāṇe sati, viññāṇaṁ upādāya, viññāṇaṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘Natthi dinnaṁ, natthi yiṭṭhaṁ … pe … kāyassa bhedā ucchijjanti vinassanti na honti paraṁ maraṇā’ti.


3Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


"Aniccaṁ, bhante … pe …

api nu taṁ anupādāya evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: ‘Natthi dinnaṁ, natthi yiṭṭhaṁ … pe … kāyassa bhedā ucchijjanti vinassanti na honti paraṁ maraṇā’"ti? "No hetaṁ, bhante". "Vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


"Aniccaṁ, bhante … pe …

api nu taṁ anupādāya evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: ‘Natthi dinnaṁ, natthi yiṭṭhaṁ … pe … kāyassa bhedā ucchijjanti vinassanti na honti paraṁ maraṇā’"ti? "No hetaṁ, bhante".

"Yampidaṁ diṭṭhaṁ sutaṁ mutaṁ viññātaṁ pattaṁ pariyesitaṁ anuvicaritaṁ manasā tampi niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


"Aniccaṁ, bhante … pe …

api nu taṁ anupādāya evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: ‘Natthi dinnaṁ, natthi yiṭṭhaṁ … pe … ye keci atthikavādaṁ vadanti; bāle ca paṇḍite ca kāyassa bhedā ucchijjanti vinassanti na honti paraṁ maraṇā’"ti?


"No hetaṁ, bhante".

4"Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa imesu ca ṭhānesu kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti, dukkhepissa kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāyapissa kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn24.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA154-156]] | S iii 206 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA154-156]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN24]]  / 🌐 [[SN24.5]]
> ◄  [[sn24.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn24.6-sujato-pali]] ►
