---
sutta_code: "SN24.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Soattāsutta "
  - "The Self"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN24]]  / 🌐 [[SN24.3]]
> ◄  [[sn24.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn24.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 24. Diṭṭhisaṁyutta: On View

### I. Stream-Entry — SN24.3: This Is My Self
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on what, does the view arise: ‘The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After passing away I will be permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable’?”


“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

2“When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the view arises: ‘The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After passing away I will be permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.’ When feeling … perception … choices … consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises: ‘The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After passing away I will be permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.’


3What do you think, bhikkhus? Is form permanent or impermanent?”


“Impermanent, sir.” …

“Is feeling … perception … choices … consciousness permanent or impermanent?”


“Impermanent, sir.” …


“That which is seen, heard, thought, known, sought, and explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?”


“Impermanent, sir.” …

“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would such a view arise?”

“No, sir.”


4“When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation, they’re called a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Kismiṁ nu kho, bhikkhave, sati, kiṁ upādāya, kiṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘so attā, so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’"ti?


"Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe … .

2"Rūpe kho, bhikkhave, sati, rūpaṁ upādāya, rūpaṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘so attā, so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’ti. Vedanāya sati … pe … saññāya sati … saṅkhāresu sati … viññāṇe sati, viññāṇaṁ upādāya, viññāṇaṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘so attā, so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’ti.


3Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


"Aniccaṁ, bhante" … pe …

api nu taṁ anupādāya evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: ‘so attā … pe … avipariṇāmadhammo’"ti? "No hetaṁ, bhante". "Vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


"Aniccaṁ bhante … pe …


api nu taṁ anupādāya evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: ‘so attā … pe … avipariṇāmadhammo’"ti? "No hetaṁ, bhante". "Yampidaṁ diṭṭhaṁ sutaṁ mutaṁ viññātaṁ pattaṁ pariyesitaṁ anuvicaritaṁ manasā tampi niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


"Aniccaṁ, bhante … pe …

api nu taṁ anupādāya evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: ‘so attā, so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’"ti?

"No hetaṁ, bhante".


4"Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa imesu ca ṭhānesu kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti, dukkhepissa kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāyapissa kaṅkhā pahīnā hoti – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano"ti.


Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn24.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA152]] | S iii 204 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN22.152]], [[SA152]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN24]]  / 🌐 [[SN24.3]]
> ◄  [[sn24.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn24.4-sujato-pali]] ►
