---
sutta_code: "SN21.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Tissasutta "
  - "Tissa"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.9]]
> ◄  [[sn21.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.10-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 21. Bhikkhusaṁyutta: With bhikkhus

### I. bhikkhus — SN21.9: With Tissa
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Tissa—the Buddha’s cousin on his father’s side—went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. He was miserable and sad, with tears flowing. Then the Buddha said to him:

“Tissa, why are you sitting there so miserable and sad, with tears flowing?”

“Sir, it’s because the bhikkhus on all sides provoke me with barbed words.”

“That’s because you admonish others, but don’t accept admonition yourself. As a gentleman who has gone forth in faith from the lay life to homelessness, it’s not appropriate for you to admonish others without accepting admonition yourself. It’s appropriate for you to admonish others and accept admonition yourself.”

2That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

3“Why are you angry? Don’t be angry!  
It’s better to not be angry, Tissa.  
For this spiritual life is lived  
in order to remove anger, conceit, and denigration.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

Atha kho āyasmā tisso bhagavato pitucchāputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi dukkhī dummano assūni pavattayamāno. Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ tissaṁ etadavoca:

"Kiṁ nu kho tvaṁ, tissa, ekamantaṁ nisinno dukkhī dummano assūni pavattayamāno"ti?

"Tathā hi pana maṁ, bhante, bhikkhū samantā vācāyasannitodakena sañjambharimakaṁsū"ti.

"Tathāhi pana tvaṁ, tissa, vattā no ca vacanakkhamo; na kho te taṁ, tissa, patirūpaṁ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajitassa, yaṁ tvaṁ vattā no ca vacanakkhamo. Etaṁ kho te, tissa, patirūpaṁ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajitassa: ‘Yaṁ tvaṁ vattā ca assa vacanakkhamo cā’"ti.

2Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 

3"Kiṁ nu kujjhasi mā kujjhi,  
Akkodho tissa te varaṁ;  
Kodhamānamakkhavinayatthañhi,  
Tissa brahmacariyaṁ vussatī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.7]], [[SA1068]] | S ii 281 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.7]], [[SA1068]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DHP\|DHP-AI115-22]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.9]]
> ◄  [[sn21.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.10-sujato-pali]] ►
