---
sutta_code: "SN21.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahākappinasutta "
  - "Mahakappina"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.11]]
> ◄  [[sn21.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.12-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 21. Bhikkhusaṁyutta: With bhikkhus

### I. bhikkhus — SN21.11: With Mahākappina
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Mahākappina went to see the Buddha.

The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance, and addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus, do you you see that bhikkhu coming—white, thin, with a pointy nose?”


“Yes, sir.”

“That bhikkhu is very mighty and powerful. It’s not easy to find an attainment that he has not already attained. And he has realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.”

2That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

3“The aristocrat is best of those people  
who take clan as the standard.  
But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct  
is best of gods and humans.

4The sun shines by day,  
the moon glows at night,  
the aristocrat shines in armor,  
and the brahmin shines in jhāna.  
But all day and all night,  
the Buddha shines with glory.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

Atha kho āyasmā mahākappino yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami.

Addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ mahākappinaṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ. Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: "passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, etaṁ bhikkhuṁ āgacchantaṁ odātakaṁ tanukaṁ tuṅganāsikan"ti?


"Evaṁ, bhante".

"Eso kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mahiddhiko mahānubhāvo. Na ca sā samāpatti sulabharūpā yā tena bhikkhunā asamāpannapubbā. Yassa catthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajanti tadanuttaraṁ brahmacariyapariyosānaṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāratī"ti.

2Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 

3"Khattiyo seṭṭho janetasmiṁ,  
ye gottapaṭisārino;  
Vijjācaraṇasampanno,  
so seṭṭho devamānuse.

4Divā tapati ādicco,  
rattimābhāti candimā;  
Sannaddho khattiyo tapati,  
jhāyī tapati brāhmaṇo;  
Atha sabbamahorattiṁ,  
buddho tapati tejasā"ti.

Ekādasamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S ii 284 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DHP\|DHP387]], [[SN1.26]], [[SN2.4]], [[AN11.10]], [[DN27]], [[DN3]], [[MN53]], [[SN6.11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.11]]
> ◄  [[sn21.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.12-sujato-pali]] ►
