---
sutta_code: "SN21.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Nandasutta "
  - "Nanda"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.8]]
> ◄  [[sn21.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.9-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 21. Bhikkhusaṁyutta: With bhikkhus

### I. bhikkhus — SN21.8: With Nanda
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Nanda—the Buddha’s cousin on his mother’s side—dressed in nicely pressed and ironed robes, applied eyeshadow, and took a polished black bowl. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

“Nanda, as a gentleman who has gone forth in faith from the lay life to homelessness, it’s not appropriate for you to dress in nicely pressed and ironed robes, apply eyeshadow, and carry a polished black bowl. It’s appropriate for you to stay in the wilderness, eat only alms-food, wear rag robes, and live without concern for sensual pleasures.”


That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

2“When will I see Nanda  
in the wilderness, wearing rag robes,  
feeding on scraps offered by strangers,  
unconcerned for sensual pleasures?”

3Then some time later Venerable Nanda stayed in the wilderness, ate only alms-food, wore rag robes, and lived without concern for sensual pleasures.

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

Atha kho āyasmā nando bhagavato mātucchāputto ākoṭitapaccākoṭitāni cīvarāni pārupitvā akkhīni añjetvā acchaṁ pattaṁ gahetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho āyasmantaṁ nandaṁ bhagavā etadavoca:

"na kho te taṁ, nanda, patirūpaṁ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajitassa, yaṁ tvaṁ ākoṭitapaccākoṭitāni cīvarāni pārupeyyāsi, akkhīni ca añjeyyāsi, acchañca pattaṁ dhāreyyāsi. Etaṁ kho te, nanda, patirūpaṁ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajitassa, yaṁ tvaṁ āraññiko ca assasi, piṇḍapātiko ca paṁsukūliko ca kāmesu ca anapekkho vihareyyāsī"ti.


Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … satthā: 

2"Kadāhaṁ nandaṁ passeyyaṁ,  
āraññaṁ paṁsukūlikaṁ;  
Aññātuñchena yāpentaṁ,  
kāmesu anapekkhinan"ti.

3Atha kho āyasmā nando aparena samayena āraññiko ca piṇḍapātiko ca paṁsukūliko ca kāmesu ca anapekkho vihāsīti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA18.6]], [[SA-2.5]], [[SA1067]] | S ii 281 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA18.6]], [[SA-2.5]], [[SA1067]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DHP\|DHP-AI115-22]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.8]]
> ◄  [[sn21.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.9-sujato-pali]] ►
