---
sutta_code: "SN21.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Sujātasutta "
  - "Sujata"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.5]]
> ◄  [[sn21.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.6-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 21. Bhikkhusaṁyutta: With bhikkhus

### I. bhikkhus — SN21.5: With Sujāta
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Sujāta went to see the Buddha.

The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance, and addressed the bhikkhus: “This gentleman is beautiful in both ways. He’s attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. And he has realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.”


That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

2“This bhikkhu is truly beautiful.  
His heart is upright,  
he’s unfettered, detached,  
extinguished by not grasping.  
He carries his final body,  
having vanquished Māra and his mount.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

Atha kho āyasmā sujāto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami.

Addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ sujātaṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ. Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: "ubhayenevāyaṁ, bhikkhave, kulaputto sobhati – yañca abhirūpo dassanīyo pāsādiko paramāya vaṇṇapokkharatāya samannāgato, yassa catthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajanti tadanuttaraṁ brahmacariyapariyosānaṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāratī"ti.


Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … satthā: 

2"Sobhati vatāyaṁ bhikkhu,  
ujubhūtena cetasā;  
Vippayutto visaṁyutto,  
anupādāya nibbuto;  
Dhāreti antimaṁ dehaṁ,  
jetvā māraṁ savāhinin"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.1]], [[SA1062]] | S ii 278 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.1]], [[SA1062]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[UD7.5.UD76]], [[AN6.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.5]]
> ◄  [[sn21.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.6-sujato-pali]] ►
