---
sutta_code: "SN21.6"
sutta_title:
  - "Lakuṇḍakabhaddiyasutta "
  - "Lakuṇṭaka Bhaddiya"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.6]]
> ◄  [[sn21.5-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.7-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 21. Bhikkhusaṁyutta: With bhikkhus

### I. bhikkhus — SN21.6: With Bhaddiya the Dwarf
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Lakuṇṭaka Bhaddiya went to see the Buddha.

The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance, and addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus, do you you see this bhikkhu coming—ugly, unsightly, deformed, and despised by the bhikkhus?”


“Yes, sir.”

“That bhikkhu is very mighty and powerful. It’s not easy to find an attainment that he has not already attained. And he has realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.”


That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

2“Geese, herons, and peacocks,  
elephants and spotted deer—  
though their bodies are not equal,  
they all fear the lion.

3So it is for humans—  
if a little person is wise,  
they’re the truly great one,  
not the fool with a good body.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

Atha kho āyasmā lakuṇḍakabhaddiyo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami.

Addasā kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ lakuṇḍakabhaddiyaṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ. Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: "passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, etaṁ bhikkhuṁ āgacchantaṁ dubbaṇṇaṁ duddasikaṁ okoṭimakaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ paribhūtarūpan"ti?


"Evaṁ, bhante".

"Eso kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mahiddhiko mahānubhāvo, na ca sā samāpatti sulabharūpā yā tena bhikkhunā asamāpannapubbā. Yassa catthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṁ brahmacariyapariyosānaṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāratī"ti.


Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … satthā: 

2"Haṁsā koñcā mayūrā ca,  
hatthayo pasadā migā;  
Sabbe sīhassa bhāyanti,  
natthi kāyasmiṁ tulyatā.

3Evameva manussesu,  
daharo cepi paññavā;  
So hi tattha mahā hoti,  
neva bālo sarīravā"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.2]], [[SA1063]] | S ii 279 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.2]], [[SA1063]], [[JA202]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[UD7.5.UD76]], [[AN6.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.6]]
> ◄  [[sn21.5-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.7-sujato-pali]] ►
