---
sutta_code: "SN21.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Navasutta "
  - "The Newly Ordained Bhikkhu"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.4]]
> ◄  [[sn21.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.5-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 21. Bhikkhusaṁyutta: With bhikkhus

### I. bhikkhus — SN21.4: A Junior bhikkhu
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Now at that time a certain junior bhikkhu, after his meal, on his return from alms-round, entered his dwelling, where he adhered to passivity and silence. And he didn’t help the bhikkhus out when it was time to sew robes. Then several bhikkhus went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.


2So the Buddha said to a certain bhikkhu: “Please, bhikkhu, in my name tell that bhikkhu that the Teacher summons him.”

“Yes, sir,” that bhikkhu replied. He went to that bhikkhu and said to him: “Reverend, the teacher summons you.”

“Yes, reverend,” that bhikkhu replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

“Is it really true, bhikkhu, that after your meal, on your return from alms-round, you entered your dwelling, where you adhered to passivity and silence, and you didn’t help the bhikkhus out when it was time to sew robes?”

“Sir, I am doing my own work.”

3Then the Buddha, knowing what that bhikkhu was thinking, addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus, don’t complain about this bhikkhu. This bhikkhu gets the four jhānas — blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind — when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. He has realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.”

4That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

5“Not by being slack,  
or with little strength  
is extinguishment realized,  
the freedom from all suffering.

6This young bhikkhu,  
this best of men,  
carries his final body,  
having vanquished Māra and his mount.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

Tena kho pana samayena aññataro navo bhikkhu pacchābhattaṁ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto vihāraṁ pavisitvā appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyati, na bhikkhūnaṁ veyyāvaccaṁ karoti cīvarakārasamaye. Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu. Ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ: "idha, bhante, aññataro navo bhikkhu pacchābhattaṁ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto vihāraṁ pavisitvā appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyati, na bhikkhūnaṁ veyyāvaccaṁ karoti cīvarakārasamaye"ti.


2Atha kho bhagavā aññataraṁ bhikkhuṁ āmantesi: "ehi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, mama vacanena taṁ bhikkhuṁ āmantehi ‘satthā taṁ, āvuso, āmantetī’"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato paṭissutvā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca: "satthā taṁ, āvuso, āmantetī"ti.

"Evamāvuso"ti kho so bhikkhu tassa bhikkhuno paṭissutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi.

Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho taṁ bhikkhuṁ bhagavā etadavoca: "Saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, pacchābhattaṁ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto vihāraṁ pavisitvā appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyasi, na bhikkhūnaṁ veyyāvaccaṁ karosi cīvarakārasamaye"ti?

"Ahampi kho, bhante, sakaṁ kiccaṁ karomī"ti.

3Atha kho bhagavā tassa bhikkhuno cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya bhikkhū āmantesi: "Mā kho tumhe, bhikkhave, etassa bhikkhuno ujjhāyittha. Eso kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu catunnaṁ jhānānaṁ ābhicetasikānaṁ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṁ nikāmalābhī akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, yassa catthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṁ brahmacariyapariyosānaṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāratī"ti.

4Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 

5"Nayidaṁ sithilamārabbha,  
nayidaṁ appena thāmasā;  
Nibbānaṁ adhigantabbaṁ,  
sabbadukkhappamocanaṁ.

6Ayañca daharo bhikkhu,  
ayamuttamapuriso;  
Dhāreti antimaṁ dehaṁ,  
jetvā māraṁ savāhinin"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.9]], [[SA1070]] | S ii 277 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.9]], [[SA1070]], [[THAG20]].1 |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[UD7.5.UD76]], [[AN6.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.4]]
> ◄  [[sn21.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.5-sujato-pali]] ►
