---
sutta_code: "SN21.7"
sutta_title:
  - "Visākhasutta "
  - "Visakha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.7]]
> ◄  [[sn21.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.8-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 21. Bhikkhusaṁyutta: With bhikkhus

### I. bhikkhus — SN21.7: With Visākha, Pañcāli’s Son
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s son, was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the bhikkhus in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk. His words were polished, clear, articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent.

2Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out, and addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus, who was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the bhikkhus in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk?”


“Sir, it was Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s son.”


3Then the Buddha said to Visākha:

“Good, good, Visākha! It’s good that you educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the bhikkhus in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk, with words that are polished, clear, articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent.”

4That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

5“Though an astute person is mixed up with fools,  
they don’t know unless he speaks.  
But when he speaks they know,  
he’s teaching the deathless state.

6He should speak and illustrate the teaching,  
holding up the banner of the hermits.  
Words well spoken are the hermits’ banner,  
for the teaching is the banner of the hermits.”


#### Pali

1Evaṁ me sutaṁ— ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā vesāliyaṁ vihārati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṁ.

Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā visākho pañcālaputto upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṁseti, poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā pariyāpannāya anissitāya.

2Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṁ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yena upaṭṭhānasālā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Nisajja kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: "ko nu kho, bhikkhave, upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṁseti poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā pariyāpannāya anissitāyā"ti?


"Āyasmā, bhante, visākho pañcālaputto upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandasseti samādapeti samuttejeti sampahaṁseti, poriyā vācāya vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā pariyāpannāya anissitāyā"ti.


3Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ visākhaṁ pañcālaputtaṁ āmantesi:

"sādhu sādhu, visākha, sādhu kho tvaṁ, visākha, bhikkhū dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi … pe … atthassa viññāpaniyā pariyāpannāya anissitāyā"ti.

4Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 

5"Nābhāsamānaṁ jānanti,  
missaṁ bālehi paṇḍitaṁ;  
Bhāsamānañca jānanti,  
desentaṁ amataṁ padaṁ.

6Bhāsaye jotaye dhammaṁ,  
paggaṇhe isinaṁ dhajaṁ;  
Subhāsitadhajā isayo,  
dhammo hi isinaṁ dhajo"ti.


Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.7-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.8]], [[SA1069]] | S ii 280 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN4.48]], [[SA-2.8]], [[SA1069]], [[JA537]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.7]]
> ◄  [[sn21.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn21.8-sujato-pali]] ►
