---
sutta_code: "SN48.58"
sutta_title:
  - "Sūkarakhatasutta "
  - "The Boar's Cave"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.58]]
> ◄  [[sn48.57-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.59-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### VI. The Boar’s Cave — SN48.58: The Boar’s Cave
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain in the Boar’s Cave. Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta:

“Sāriputta, considering what benefit does a bhikkhu with defilements ended, while still alive, continue to show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions?”

“Sir, it is considering the supreme sanctuary that a bhikkhu with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions.”

“Good, good, Sāriputta! For it is considering the supreme sanctuary that a bhikkhu whose defilements are ended, while still alive, continues to show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions.


2And what is that supreme sanctuary?”


“It’s when a bhikkhu with defilements ended develops the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening. It is considering this supreme sanctuary that a bhikkhu with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions.”


“Good, good, Sāriputta! For this is that supreme sanctuary.


3And what is that utmost devotion that a bhikkhu with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show towards the Realized One or his instructions?”

“It’s when a bhikkhu with defilements ended maintains respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion. This is that utmost devotion.”

“Good, good, Sāriputta! For this is that utmost devotion that a bhikkhu with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show towards the Realized One or his instructions.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā rājagahe vihārati gijjhakūṭe pabbate sūkarakhatāyaṁ. Tatra kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ sāriputtaṁ āmantesi:

"Kiṁ nu kho, sāriputta, atthavasaṁ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattatī"ti?

"Anuttarañhi, bhante, yogakkhemaṁ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattatī"ti.

"Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. Anuttarañhi, sāriputta, yogakkhemaṁ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattati.


2Katamo ca, sāriputta, anuttaro yogakkhemo yaṁ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattatī"ti?


"Idha, bhante, khīṇāsavo bhikkhu saddhindriyaṁ bhāveti upasamagāmiṁ sambodhagāmiṁ, vīriyindriyaṁ bhāveti … pe … satindriyaṁ bhāveti … samādhindriyaṁ bhāveti … paññindriyaṁ bhāveti upasamagāmiṁ sambodhagāmiṁ. Ayaṁ kho, bhante, anuttaro yogakkhemo yaṁ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattatī"ti.


"Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. Eso hi, sāriputta, anuttaro yogakkhemo yaṁ sampassamāno khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattatīti.


3Katamo ca, sāriputta, paramanipaccakāro yaṁ khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattatī"ti?

"Idha, bhante, khīṇāsavo bhikkhu satthari sagāravo vihārati sappatisso, dhamme sagāravo vihārati sappatisso, saṅghe sagāravo vihārati sappatisso, sikkhāya sagāravo vihārati sappatisso, samādhismiṁ sagāravo vihārati sappatisso. Ayaṁ kho, bhante, paramanipaccakāro yaṁ khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattatī"ti.

"Sādhu sādhu, sāriputta. Eso hi, sāriputta, paramanipaccakāro yaṁ khīṇāsavo bhikkhu tathāgate vā tathāgatāsāsane vā paramanipaccakāraṁ pavattamāno pavattatī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.58-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 233 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.58]]
> ◄  [[sn48.57-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.59-sujato-pali]] ►
