---
sutta_code: "SN48.49"
sutta_title:
  - "Piṇḍolabhāradvājasutta "
  - "Piṇḍola"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.49]]
> ◄  [[sn48.48-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.50-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### V. Old Age — SN48.49: About Bhāradvāja the Alms-gatherer
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja had declared enlightenment: “I understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”


Then several bhikkhus went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

2Then they said, “What reason does Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja see for doing this?”


3“It’s because Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja has developed and cultivated three faculties that he declares enlightenment: ‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.”’

What three? The faculties of mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.


It’s because Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja has developed and cultivated these three faculties that he declares enlightenment.


What’s the culmination of these three faculties? They culminate in ending. In the ending of what? Of rebirth, old age, and death.

It’s because he sees that they culminate in the ending of rebirth, old age, and death that Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja declares enlightenment: ‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.”’”

#### Pali

1Evaṁ me sutaṁ— ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā kosambiyaṁ vihārati ghositārāme.

Tena kho pana samayena āyasmatā piṇḍolabhāradvājena aññā byākatā hoti: "khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyāti pajānāmī"ti.


Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu. Ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ: 

2"Āyasmatā, bhante, piṇḍolabhāradvājena aññā byākatā: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. Kiṁ nu kho, bhante, atthavasaṁ sampassamānena āyasmatā piṇḍolabhāradvājena aññā byākatā: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī"ti?


3"Tiṇṇannaṁ kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā piṇḍolabhāradvājena bhikkhunā aññā byākatā: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti.

Katamesaṁ tiṇṇannaṁ? Satindriyassa, samādhindriyassa, paññindriyassa


Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tiṇṇannaṁ indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā piṇḍolabhāradvājena bhikkhunā aññā byākatā: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti.


Imāni ca, bhikkhave, tīṇindriyāni kimantāni? Khayantāni. Kissa khayantāni? Jātijarāmaraṇassa.

‘Jātijarāmaraṇaṁ khayan’ti kho, bhikkhave, sampassamānena piṇḍolabhāradvājena bhikkhunā aññā byākatā: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.49-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 224 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.49]]
> ◄  [[sn48.48-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.50-sujato-pali]] ►
