---
sutta_code: "SN48.30"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta "
  - "Ascetics and Brahmins (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.30]]
> ◄  [[sn48.29-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.31-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### III. The Six Faculties — SN48.30: Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t understand the eye faculty, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They don’t understand the ear faculty … nose faculty … tongue faculty … body faculty … mind faculty, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I don’t regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight.

2There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the eye faculty, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They understand the ear faculty … nose faculty … tongue faculty … body faculty … mind faculty, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.”

1"Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā cakkhundriyaṁ nappajānanti, cakkhundriyasamudayaṁ nappajānanti, cakkhundriyanirodhaṁ nappajānanti, cakkhundriyanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ nappajānanti; sotindriyaṁ … pe … ghānindriyaṁ … pe … jivhindriyaṁ … pe … kāyindriyaṁ … pe … manindriyaṁ nappajānanti, manindriyasamudayaṁ nappajānanti, manindriyanirodhaṁ nappajānanti, manindriyanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ nappajānanti. Na me te, bhikkhave … pe … sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāranti.

2Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā cakkhundriyaṁ pajānanti, cakkhundriyasamudayaṁ pajānanti, cakkhundriyanirodhaṁ pajānanti, cakkhundriyanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ pajānanti, sotindriyaṁ … pe … ghānindriyaṁ … pe … jivhindriyaṁ … pe … kāyindriyaṁ … pe … manindriyaṁ pajānanti, manindriyasamudayaṁ pajānanti, manindriyanirodhaṁ pajānanti, manindriyanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ pajānanti, te kho me, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu ceva samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu ca brāhmaṇasammatā, te ca panāyasmanto sāmaññatthañca brahmaññatthañca diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihārantī"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Chaḷindriyavaggo tatiyo.

3Punabbhavo jīvitaññāya,  
ekabījī ca suddhakaṁ;  
Soto arahasambuddho,  
dve ca samaṇabrāhmaṇāti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.30-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 206 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.30]]
> ◄  [[sn48.29-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.31-sujato-pali]] ►
