---
sutta_code: "SN48.68"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.68]]
> ◄  [[sn48.67-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.69-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### VII. Leading to Awakening — SN48.68: A Tree (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, of all the trees belonging to the gods of the Thirty-Three, the Shady Orchid Tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.

And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened.

Of all the trees belonging to the gods of the Thirty-Three, the shady orchid tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci devānaṁ tāvatiṁsānaṁ rukkhā, pārichattako tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – bodhāya.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyā dhammā? Saddhindriyaṁ, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati. Vīriyindriyaṁ … pe … satindriyaṁ … samādhindriyaṁ … paññindriyaṁ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati.

Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci devānaṁ tāvatiṁsānaṁ rukkhā, pārichattako tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – bodhāyā"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.68-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.68]]
> ◄  [[sn48.67-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.69-sujato-pali]] ►
