---
sutta_code: "SN48.48"
sutta_title:
  - "Catutthapubbārāmasutta "
  - "The Eastern Park (4)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.48]]
> ◄  [[sn48.47-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.49-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### V. Old Age — SN48.48: At the Eastern Monastery (4th)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1The same setting.

“bhikkhus, how many faculties must a bhikkhu develop and cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: ‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence”’?”


2“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

“A bhikkhu must develop and cultivate five faculties so that they can declare enlightenment. What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

These are the five faculties that a bhikkhu must develop and cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: ‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence”’.”

#### Pali

1Taṁyeva nidānaṁ.

"Katinaṁ nu kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī"ti?


2"Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe …

… "pañcannaṁ kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. Katamesaṁ pañcannaṁ? Saddhindriyassa, vīriyindriyassa, satindriyassa, samādhindriyassa, paññindriyassa – 

imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.48-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 223 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.48]]
> ◄  [[sn48.47-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.49-sujato-pali]] ►
