---
sutta_code: "SN48.46"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyapubbārāmasutta "
  - "The Eastern Park (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.46]]
> ◄  [[sn48.45-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.47-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### V. Old Age — SN48.46: At the Eastern Monastery (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1The same setting.

“bhikkhus, how many faculties must a bhikkhu develop and cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: ‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence”’?”


2“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

“A bhikkhu must develop and cultivate two faculties so that they can declare enlightenment. What two? Noble wisdom and noble freedom. For their noble wisdom is the faculty of wisdom. And their noble freedom is the faculty of immersion.

These are the two faculties that a bhikkhu must develop and cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: ‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence”’.”

#### Pali

1Taṁyeva nidānaṁ.

"Katinaṁ nu kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī"ti?


2"Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe …

… "dvinnaṁ kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. Katamesaṁ dvinnaṁ? Ariyāya ca paññāya, ariyāya ca vimuttiyā. Yā hissa, bhikkhave, ariyā paññā tadassa paññindriyaṁ. Yā hissa, bhikkhave, ariyā vimutti tadassa samādhindriyaṁ.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, dvinnaṁ indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.46-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 222 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.46]]
> ◄  [[sn48.45-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.47-sujato-pali]] ►
