---
sutta_code: "SN48.35"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta "
  - "Ascetics and Brahmins (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.35]]
> ◄  [[sn48.34-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.36-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### IV. The leasure Faculty — SN48.35: Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

“bhikkhus, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t understand the faculty of pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. There are ascetics and brahmins who don’t understand the faculty of pain … happiness … sadness … equanimity, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I don’t regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight.

2There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the faculty of pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the faculty of pain … happiness … sadness … equanimity, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Sukhindriyaṁ, dukkhindriyaṁ, somanassindriyaṁ, domanassindriyaṁ, upekkhindriyaṁ. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā sukhindriyaṁ nappajānanti, sukhindriyasamudayaṁ nappajānanti, sukhindriyanirodhaṁ nappajānanti, sukhindriyanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ nappajānanti; dukkhindriyaṁ nappajānanti … pe … somanassindriyaṁ nappajānanti … pe … domanassindriyaṁ nappajānanti … pe … upekkhindriyaṁ nappajānanti, upekkhindriyasamudayaṁ nappajānanti, upekkhindriyanirodhaṁ nappajānanti, upekkhindriyanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ nappajānanti; na me te, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu vā samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu vā brāhmaṇasammatā, na ca panete āyasmanto sāmaññatthaṁ vā brahmaññatthaṁ vā diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāranti.

2Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā sukhindriyaṁ pajānanti, sukhindriyasamudayaṁ pajānanti, sukhindriyanirodhaṁ pajānanti, sukhindriyanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ pajānanti; dukkhindriyaṁ pajānanti … pe … somanassindriyaṁ pajānanti … pe … domanassindriyaṁ pajānanti … pe … upekkhindriyaṁ pajānanti, upekkhindriyasamudayaṁ pajānanti, upekkhindriyanirodhaṁ pajānanti, upekkhindriyanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ pajānanti, te ca kho me, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu ceva samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu ca brāhmaṇasammatā, te ca panāyasmanto sāmaññatthañca brahmaññatthañca diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihārantī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.35-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 208 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.35]]
> ◄  [[sn48.34-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.36-sujato-pali]] ►
