---
sutta_code: "SN48.71"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.71]]
> ◄  [[sn48.70-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.83-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### VIII. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges — SN48.71-82: Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In the same way, a bhikkhu developing and cultivating the five faculties slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

How so? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

That’s how a bhikkhu developing and cultivating the five faculties slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

To be expanded for each of the different rivers as in SN45.91-102.


2Six on slanting to the east,  
and six on slanting to the ocean;  
these two sixes make twelve,  
and that’s how this chapter is recited.

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcindriyāni bhāvento pañcindriyāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcindriyāni bhāvento pañcindriyāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddhindriyaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ, vīriyindriyaṁ … pe … satindriyaṁ … samādhindriyaṁ … paññindriyaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcindriyāni bhāvento pañcindriyāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro"ti.

Dvādasamaṁ.

Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo aṭṭhamo.


2Cha pācīnato ninnā,  
cha ninnā ca samuddato;  
Dvete cha dvādasa honti,  
vaggo tena pavuccatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.71-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.71]]
> ◄  [[sn48.70-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.83-sujato-pali]] ►
