---
sutta_code: "SN48.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Daṭṭhabbasutta "
  - "To Be Seen"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.8]]
> ◄  [[sn48.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.9-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### I. Plain Version — SN48.8: Should Be Seen
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And where should the faculty of faith be seen? In the four factors of stream-entry.

And where should the faculty of energy be seen? In the four right efforts.

And where should the faculty of mindfulness be seen? In the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And where should the faculty of immersion be seen? In the four jhānas.

And where should the faculty of wisdom be seen? In the four noble truths.

These are the five faculties.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṁ … pe … paññindriyaṁ.

Kattha ca, bhikkhave, saddhindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ? Catūsu sotāpattiyaṅgesu – ettha saddhindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Kattha ca, bhikkhave, vīriyindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ? Catūsu sammappadhānesu – ettha vīriyindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Kattha ca, bhikkhave, satindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ? Catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu – ettha satindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Kattha ca, bhikkhave, samādhindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ? Catūsu jhānesu – ettha samādhindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Kattha ca, bhikkhave, paññindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ? Catūsu ariyasaccesu – ettha paññindriyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyānī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA646]], [[SA675]] | S v 196 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN5.14-15]], [[SA675]], [[SA646]], [[AN5.15]], [[PE6]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN8.30.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.8]]
> ◄  [[sn48.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.9-sujato-pali]] ►
