---
sutta_code: "SN48.19"
sutta_title:
  - "Sampannasutta "
  - "Equipped"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.19]]
> ◄  [[sn48.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.20-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### II. Weaker — SN48.19: Endowed
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

2“Sir, they speak of someone who is ‘accomplished regarding the faculties’. How is someone accomplished regarding the faculties defined?”

“bhikkhu, it’s when a bhikkhu develops the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom that lead to peace and awakening.

This is how someone who is accomplished regarding the faculties is defined.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 

2"‘Indriyasampanno, indriyasampanno’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, indriyasampanno hotī"ti?

"Idha, bhikkhu, bhikkhu saddhindriyaṁ bhāveti upasamagāmiṁ sambodhagāmiṁ, vīriyindriyaṁ bhāveti upasamagāmiṁ sambodhagāmiṁ, satindriyaṁ bhāveti upasamagāmiṁ sambodhagāmiṁ, samādhindriyaṁ bhāveti upasamagāmiṁ sambodhagāmiṁ, paññindriyaṁ bhāveti upasamagāmiṁ sambodhagāmiṁ.

Ettāvatā kho, bhikkhu, bhikkhu indriyasampanno hotī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 202 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.19]]
> ◄  [[sn48.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.20-sujato-pali]] ►
