---
sutta_code: "SN48.51"
sutta_title:
  - "Sālasutta "
  - "Sala"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.51]]
> ◄  [[sn48.50-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.52-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### VI. The Boar’s Cave — SN48.51: At Sālā
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans near the brahmin village of Sālā. There the Buddha addressed the bhikkhus:

“bhikkhus, the lion, king of beasts, is said to be the best of animals in terms of strength, speed, and courage. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.

2And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened.

The lion, king of beasts, is said to be the best of animals in terms of strength, speed, and courage. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.”

#### Pali

1Evaṁ me sutaṁ— ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā kosalesu vihārati sālāya brāhmaṇagāme. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi:

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci tiracchānagatā pāṇā, sīho migarājā tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – thāmena javena sūrena; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – bodhāya.

2Katame ca, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyā dhammā? Saddhindriyaṁ, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati; vīriyindriyaṁ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati; satindriyaṁ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati; samādhindriyaṁ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati; paññindriyaṁ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati.

Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci tiracchānagatā pāṇā, sīho migarājā tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – thāmena javena sūrena; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – bodhāyā"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.51-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 227 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.51]]
> ◄  [[sn48.50-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.52-sujato-pali]] ►
