---
sutta_code: "SN48.45"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamapubbārāmasutta "
  - "The Eastern Park (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.45]]
> ◄  [[sn48.44-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.46-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### V. Old Age — SN48.45: At the Eastern Monastery (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother. There the Buddha addressed the bhikkhus:

“bhikkhus, how many faculties must a bhikkhu develop and cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: ‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence”’?”


2“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

“A bhikkhu must develop and cultivate one faculty so that they can declare enlightenment. What one? The faculty of wisdom. When a noble disciple has wisdom, the faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion that follow along with that become stabilized.

This is the one faculty that a bhikkhu must develop and cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: ‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence”’.”

#### Pali

1Evaṁ me sutaṁ— ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi:

"katinaṁ nu kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī"ti?


2"Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe …

… "ekassa kho, bhikkhave, indriyassa bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. Katamassa ekassa paññindriyassa paññavato, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa tadanvayā saddhā saṇṭhāti, tadanvayaṁ vīriyaṁ saṇṭhāti, tadanvayā sati saṇṭhāti, tadanvayo samādhi saṇṭhāti.

Imassa kho, bhikkhave, ekassa indriyassa bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṁ byākaroti: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.45-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 222 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.45]]
> ◄  [[sn48.44-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.46-sujato-pali]] ►
