---
sutta_code: "SN48.18"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭipannasutta "
  - "Practising"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.18]]
> ◄  [[sn48.17-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.19-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### II. Weaker — SN48.18: Practicing
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they’re practicing to realize the fruit of perfection … a non-returner … practicing to realize the fruit of non-return … a once-returner … practicing to realize the fruit of once-return … a stream-enterer … practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry.

Someone who totally and utterly lacks these five faculties is an outsider who belongs with the ordinary persons, I say.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṁ … pe … paññindriyaṁ – imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyāni.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ indriyānaṁ samattā paripūrattā arahaṁ hoti, tato mudutarehi arahattaphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanno hoti, tato mudutarehi anāgāmī hoti, tato mudutarehi anāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanno hoti, tato mudutarehi sakadāgāmī hoti, tato mudutarehi sakadāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanno hoti, tato mudutarehi sotāpanno hoti, tato mudutarehi sotāpattiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanno hoti.

Yassa kho, bhikkhave, imāni pañcindriyāni sabbena sabbaṁ sabbathā sabbaṁ natthi, tamahaṁ ‘bāhiro puthujjanapakkhe ṭhito’ti vadāmī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA652]] | S v 202 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN48.14]], [[SA652]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.18]]
> ◄  [[sn48.17-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.19-sujato-pali]] ►
