---
sutta_code: "SN48.38"
sutta_title:
  - "Tatiyavibhaṅgasutta "
  - "Analysis (3)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.38]]
> ◄  [[sn48.37-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.39-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### IV. The leasure Faculty — SN48.38: Analysis (3rd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

2And what is the faculty of pleasure? Physical enjoyment, physical pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that’s born from physical contact. This is called the faculty of pleasure.

3And what is the faculty of pain? Physical pain, physical displeasure, the painful, unpleasant feeling that’s born from physical contact. This is called the faculty of pain.

4And what is the faculty of happiness? Mental enjoyment, mental pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that’s born from mind contact. This is called the faculty of happiness.

5And what is the faculty of sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the painful, unpleasant feeling that’s born from mind contact. This is called the faculty of sadness.

6And what is the faculty of equanimity? Neither pleasant nor unpleasant feeling, whether physical or mental. This is the faculty of equanimity.

7In this context, the faculties of pleasure and happiness should be seen as pleasant feeling. The faculties of pain and sadness should be seen as painful feeling. The faculty of equanimity should be seen as neutral feeling.

That’s how these five faculties, depending on how they’re explained, having been five become three, and having been three become five.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Sukhindriyaṁ, dukkhindriyaṁ, somanassindriyaṁ, domanassindriyaṁ, upekkhindriyaṁ.

2Katamañca, bhikkhave, sukhindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, kāyikaṁ sukhaṁ, kāyikaṁ sātaṁ, kāyasamphassajaṁ sukhaṁ sātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sukhindriyaṁ.

3Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, kāyikaṁ dukkhaṁ, kāyikaṁ asātaṁ, kāyasamphassajaṁ dukkhaṁ asātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhindriyaṁ.

4Katamañca, bhikkhave, somanassindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, cetasikaṁ sukhaṁ, cetasikaṁ sātaṁ, manosamphassajaṁ sukhaṁ sātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, somanassindriyaṁ.

5Katamañca, bhikkhave, domanassindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, cetasikaṁ dukkhaṁ, cetasikaṁ asātaṁ, manosamphassajaṁ dukkhaṁ asātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, domanassindriyaṁ.

6Katamañca, bhikkhave, upekkhindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, kāyikaṁ vā cetasikaṁ vā neva sātaṁ nāsātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, upekkhindriyaṁ.

7Tatra, bhikkhave, yañca sukhindriyaṁ yañca somanassindriyaṁ, sukhā sā vedanā daṭṭhabbā. Tatra, bhikkhave, yañca dukkhindriyaṁ yañca domanassindriyaṁ, dukkhā sā vedanā daṭṭhabbā. Tatra, bhikkhave, yadidaṁ upekkhindriyaṁ, adukkhamasukhā sā vedanā daṭṭhabbā.

Iti kho, bhikkhave, imāni pañcindriyāni pañca hutvā tīṇi honti, tīṇi hutvā pañca honti pariyāyenā"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.38-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 210 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.38]]
> ◄  [[sn48.37-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.39-sujato-pali]] ►
