---
sutta_code: "SN46.21"
sutta_title:
  - "Bodhāyasutta "
  - "To Enlightenment"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.21]]
> ◄  [[sn46.20-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.22-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 46.21 Bodhāyasuttaṃ

## SN 46.21 The Awakening Discourse

202. Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami…pe… ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca –

202.Then a certain bhikkhu approached the Blessed One…and after approaching and exchanging greetings with him, sat down to one side. When he had done so, that bhikkhu said to the Blessed One:

‘‘‘Bojjhaṅgā, bojjhaṅgā’ti, bhante, vuccanti. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, ‘bojjhaṅgā’ti vuccantī’’ti? ‘‘‘Bodhāya saṃvattantī’ti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā bojjhaṅgāti vuccanti. Idha, bhikkhu, satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ…pe… upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. ‘Bodhāya saṃvattantī’ti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā ‘bojjhaṅgā’ti vuccantī’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.

“‘Factors of enlightenment, factors of enlightenment,’ venerable sir, it is said. To what extent, venerable sir, are they called ‘factors of enlightenment’?” “They conduce to enlightenment, bhikkhu, that is why they are called ‘factors of enlightenment.’ Here, bhikkhu, one develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness, which is based upon seclusion, based upon dispassion, based upon cessation, culminating in relinquishment. One develops the enlightenment factor of investigation of states, which is based upon seclusion, based upon dispassion, based upon cessation, culminating in relinquishment. One develops the enlightenment factor of energy, which is based upon seclusion, based upon dispassion, based upon cessation, culminating in relinquishment. One develops the enlightenment factor of rapture, which is based upon seclusion, based upon dispassion, based upon cessation, culminating in relinquishment. One develops the enlightenment factor of tranquility, which is based upon seclusion, based upon dispassion, based upon cessation, culminating in relinquishment. One develops the enlightenment factor of samādhi, which is based upon seclusion, based upon dispassion, based upon cessation, culminating in relinquishment. One develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity, which is based upon seclusion, based upon dispassion, based upon cessation, culminating in relinquishment. They conduce to enlightenment, bhikkhu, that is why they are called ‘factors of enlightenment.’” The first.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.21-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 83 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN45.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.21]]
> ◄  [[sn46.20-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.22-deepseek-pali]] ►
