---
sutta_code: "SN35.72"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyachaphassāyatanasutta "
  - "The Six Bases for Contact (2)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.72]]
> ◄  [[sn35.71-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.73-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### VII. With Migajāla — SN35.72: Six Fields of Contact (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, anyone who doesn’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape has not completed the spiritual journey and is far from this teaching and training.”

2When he said this, one of the bhikkhus said to the Buddha: “Here, sir, I’m lost, truly lost. For I don’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.”

3“What do you think, bhikkhu? Do you regard the eye like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self’?”

4“Yes, sir.”

5“Good, bhikkhu! And regarding the eye, you will truly see clearly with right wisdom that: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ In this way you will give up the first field of contact, so that there are no more future lives.


6Do you regard the ear … nose … tongue … body …


9Do you regard the mind like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self’?”

10“Yes, sir.”

11“Good, bhikkhu! And regarding the mind, you will truly see clearly with right wisdom that: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ In this way you will give up the sixth field of contact, so that there are no more future lives.”

1"Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāti. Avusitaṁ tena brahmacariyaṁ, ārakā so imasmā dhammavinayā"ti.

2Evaṁ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "etthāhaṁ, bhante, anassasaṁ panassasaṁ. Ahañhi, bhante, channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāmī"ti.

3"Taṁ kiṁ maññasi, bhikkhu, cakkhuṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassasī"ti?

4"Evaṁ, bhante".

5"Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, cakkhu ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṁ bhavissati. Evaṁ te etaṁ paṭhamaṁ phassāyatanaṁ pahīnaṁ bhavissati āyatiṁ apunabbhavāya … pe … .


6"Jivhaṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassasī"ti?

7"Evaṁ, bhante".

8"Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, jivhā ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṁ bhavissati. Evaṁ te etaṁ catutthaṁ phassāyatanaṁ pahīnaṁ bhavissati āyatiṁ apunabbhavāya … pe … .


9"Manaṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassasī"ti?

10"Evaṁ, bhante".

11"Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, mano ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṁ bhavissati. Evaṁ te etaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ phassāyatanaṁ pahīnaṁ bhavissati āyatiṁ apunabbhavāyā"ti.

Dasamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.72-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA209]] | S iv 63 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA209]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.72]]
> ◄  [[sn35.71-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.73-pali-sc]] ►
