---
sutta_code: "SN35.149"
sutta_title:
  - "Aniccanibbānasappāyasutta "
  - "Conducive To Nibbana"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.149]]
> ◄  [[sn35.148-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.150-pali-sc]] ►

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XV. The Old and the New — SN35.149: Not-Self as Conducive to Extinguishment
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you a practice that’s conducive to extinguishment. Listen …

And what is that practice that’s conducive to extinguishment?

It’s when a bhikkhu sees that the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact are not-self. And they see that the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also not-self. They see that the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind, thoughts, mind-consciousness, and mind contact are not-self. And they see that the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also not-self.

This is that practice that’s conducive to extinguishment.”

“Nibbānasappāyaṁ vo, bhikkhave, paṭipadaṁ desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha … pe …

katamā ca sā, bhikkhave, nibbānasappāyā paṭipadā?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhuṁ anattāti passati, rūpā anattāti passati, cakkhuviññāṇaṁ anattāti passati, cakkhusamphasso anattāti passati, yampidaṁ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi anattāti passati … pe … mano anattāti passati, dhammā anattāti passati, manoviññāṇaṁ anattāti passati, manosamphasso anattāti passati, yampidaṁ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi anattāti passati.

Ayaṁ kho sā, bhikkhave, nibbānasappāyā paṭipadā”ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.149-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA220]] | S iv 147 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA220]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.149]]
> ◄  [[sn35.148-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.150-pali-sc]] ►
