---
sutta_code: "SN35.71"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamachaphassāyatanasutta "
  - "The Six Bases for Contact (1)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.71]]
> ◄  [[sn35.70-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.72-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### VII. With Migajāla — SN35.71: Six Fields of Contact (1st)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, anyone who doesn’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape has not completed the spiritual journey and is far from this teaching and training.”

2When he said this, one of the bhikkhus said to the Buddha: “Here, sir, I’m lost. For I don’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.”

3“What do you think, bhikkhu? Do you regard the eye like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

4“No, sir.”


5-7“Good, bhikkhu! And regarding the eye, you will truly see clearly with right wisdom that: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ Just this is the end of suffering.  
Do you regard the ear … nose … tongue … body …  
Do you regard the mind like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”


8“No, sir.”

9“Good, bhikkhu! And regarding the mind, you will truly see clearly with right wisdom that: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ Just this is the end of suffering.”

1"Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāti. Avusitaṁ tena brahmacariyaṁ, ārakā so imasmā dhammavinayā"ti.

2Evaṁ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "etthāhaṁ, bhante, anassasaṁ. Ahañhi, bhante, channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāmī"ti.

3"Taṁ kiṁ maññasi, bhikkhu, cakkhuṁ ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassasī"ti?

4"No hetaṁ, bhante".


5"Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, cakkhu ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṁ bhavissati. Esevanto dukkhassa … pe … jivhaṁ ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassasī"ti?

6"No hetaṁ, bhante".

7"Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, jivhā ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṁ bhavissati. Esevanto dukkhassa … pe … manaṁ ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassasī"ti?


8"No hetaṁ, bhante".

9"Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, mano ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṁ bhavissati. Esevanto dukkhassā"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.71-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA209]] | S iv 60 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA209]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.71]]
> ◄  [[sn35.70-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.72-pali-sc]] ►
