---
sutta_code: "SN35.142"
sutta_title:
  - "Ajjhattānattahetusutta "
  - "Nonself with Cause Internal"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.142]]
> ◄  [[sn35.141-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.143-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIV. At Devadaha — SN35.142: Interior and Cause Are Not-Self
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, the eye is not-self. The cause and condition that gives rise to the eye is also not-self. Since the eye is produced by what is not-self, how could it be self? The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is not-self. The cause and condition that gives rise to the mind is also not-self. Since the mind is produced by what is not-self, how could it be self?

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

1"Cakkhuṁ, bhikkhave, anattā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo cakkhussa uppādāya, sopi anattā. Anattasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, cakkhu kuto attā bhavissati … pe … jivhā anattā. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo jivhāya uppādāya, sopi anattā. Anattasambhūtā, bhikkhave, jivhā kuto attā bhavissati … pe … mano anattā. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo manassa uppādāya, sopi anattā. Anattasambhūto, bhikkhave, mano kuto attā bhavissati.

Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.142-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 143 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.18]], [[SN22.19]], [[SN22.20]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.142]]
> ◄  [[sn35.141-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.143-pali-sc]] ►
