---
sutta_code: "SN35.159"
sutta_title:
  - "Bāhiraaniccanandikkhayasutta "
  - "The Destruction of Delight (4)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.159]]
> ◄  [[sn35.158-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.160-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XVI. The End of Relishing — SN35.159: Focus, the Exterior, and the End of Relishing
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, properly attend to sights. Truly see the impermanence of sights. When a bhikkhu does this, they grow disillusioned with sights. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be well freed.

Properly attend to sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts. Truly see the impermanence of thoughts. When a bhikkhu does this, they grow disillusioned with thoughts. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be well freed.”

1"Rūpe, bhikkhave, yoniso manasi karotha, rūpāniccatañca yathābhūtaṁ samanupassatha. Rūpe, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yoniso manasikaronto, rūpāniccatañca yathābhūtaṁ samanupassanto rūpesupi nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṁ suvimuttanti vuccati.

Sadde … gandhe … rase … phoṭṭhabbe … dhamme, bhikkhave, yoniso manasi karotha, dhammāniccatañca yathābhūtaṁ samanupassatha. Dhamme, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yoniso manasikaronto, dhammāniccatañca yathābhūtaṁ samanupassanto dhammesupi nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṁ suvimuttanti vuccatī"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.159-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA189]] | S iv 151 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA189]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.159]]
> ◄  [[sn35.158-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.160-pali-sc]] ►
