---
sutta_code: "SN35.148"
sutta_title:
  - "Aniccanibbānasappāyasutta "
  - "Conducive To Nibbana"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.148]]
> ◄  [[sn35.147-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.149-pali-sc]] ►

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XV. The Old and the New — SN35.148: The Suffering as Conducive to Extinguishment
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you a practice that’s conducive to extinguishment. Listen …

And what is that practice that’s conducive to extinguishment?

It’s when a bhikkhu sees that the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact are suffering. And they see that the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also suffering. They see that the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind, thoughts, mind-consciousness, and mind contact are suffering. And they see that the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also suffering.

This is that practice that’s conducive to extinguishment.”

“Nibbānasappāyaṁ vo, bhikkhave, paṭipadaṁ desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha … pe …

katamā ca sā, bhikkhave, nibbānasappāyā paṭipadā?

Idha, bhikkhave, cakkhuṁ dukkhanti passati, rūpā dukkhāti passati, cakkhuviññāṇaṁ dukkhanti passati, cakkhusamphasso dukkhoti passati, yampidaṁ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi dukkhanti passati … pe … jivhā dukkhāti passati … pe … mano dukkhoti passati, dhammā dukkhāti passati, manoviññāṇaṁ dukkhanti passati, manosamphasso dukkhoti passati, yampidaṁ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi dukkhanti passati.

Ayaṁ kho sā, bhikkhave, nibbānasappāyā paṭipadā”ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.148-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA220]] | S iv 147 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA220]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.148]]
> ◄  [[sn35.147-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.149-pali-sc]] ►
