---
sutta_code: "SN35.146"
sutta_title:
  - "Kammanirodha "
  - "Cessation Of Karma"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.146]]
> ◄  [[sn35.145-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.147-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XV. The Old and the New — SN35.146: The Cessation of Action
#### B. Sujato


1“Mendicants, I will teach you old action, new action, the cessation of action, and the practice that leads to the cessation of action. Listen and pay close attention, I will speak. …

And what is old action?


The eye is old action. It should be seen as produced by choices and intentions, as something to be felt. The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is old action. It should be seen as produced by choices and intentions, as something to be felt.

This is called old action.


And what is new action?

The deeds you currently perform by way of body, speech, and mind. This is called new action.

And what is the cessation of action?

When you experience freedom due to the cessation of deeds by body, speech, and mind. This is called the cessation of action.

And what’s the practice that leads to the cessation of action?


It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of action.


So, mendicants, I’ve taught you old action, new action, the cessation of action, and the practice that leads to the cessation of action.

Out of compassion, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice jhāna, mendicants! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction to you.”

1"Navapurāṇāni, bhikkhave, kammāni desessāmi kammanirodhaṁ kammanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadāṁ. Taṁ suṇātha, sādhukaṁ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmīti.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, purāṇakammaṁ?


Cakkhu, bhikkhave, purāṇakammaṁ abhisaṅkhataṁ abhisañcetayitaṁ vedaniyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ … pe … jivhā purāṇakammā abhisaṅkhatā abhisañcetayitā vedaniyā daṭṭhabbā … pe … mano purāṇakammo abhisaṅkhato abhisañcetayito vedaniyo daṭṭhabbo.

Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, purāṇakammaṁ.


Katamañca, bhikkhave, navakammaṁ?

Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, etarahi kammaṁ karoti kāyena vācāya manasā, idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, navakammaṁ.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, kammanirodho?

Yo kho, bhikkhave, kāyakammavacīkammamanokammassa nirodhā vimuttiṁ phusati, ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammanirodho.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, kammanirodhagāminī paṭipadā?


Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi, sammāsaṅkappo, sammāvācā, sammākammanto, sammāājīvo, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati, sammāsamādhi – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, kammanirodhagāminī paṭipadā.


Iti kho, bhikkhave, desitaṁ mayā purāṇakammaṁ, desitaṁ navakammaṁ, desito kammanirodho, desitā kammanirodhagāminī paṭipadā.

Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, satthārā karaṇīyaṁ sāvakānaṁ hitesinā anukampakena anukampāṁ upādāya, kataṁ vo taṁ mayā. Etāni, bhikkhave, rukkhamūlāni, etāni suññāgārāni. Jhāyatha, bhikkhave, mā pamādattha; mā pacchāvippaṭisārino ahuvattha. Ayaṁ vo amhākaṁ anusāsanī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.146-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 146 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN101]], [[AN6.63]], [[SN12.37]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.146]]
> ◄  [[sn35.145-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.147-pali-sc]] ►
