---
sutta_code: "SN35.123"
sutta_title:
  - "Upādāniyadhammasutta "
  - "Things That Can Be Clung To"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.123]]
> ◄  [[sn35.122-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.124-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XII. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation — SN35.123: Things Prone to Being Grasped
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the things that are prone to being grasped, and the grasping. Listen …

What are the things that are prone to being grasped? And what is the grasping? There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are called the things that are prone to being grasped. The desire and greed for them is the grasping. There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are called the things that are prone to being grasped. The desire and greed for them is the grasping.”

1"Upādāniye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi upādānañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā, katamañca upādānaṁ? Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā. Yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha upādānaṁ … pe … santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā. Yo tattha chandarāgo taṁ tattha upādānan"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Lokakāmaguṇavaggo dutiyo.

2Mārapāsena dve vuttā,  
lokakāmaguṇena ca;  
Sakko pañcasikho ceva,  
sāriputto ca rāhulo;  
Saṁyojanaṁ upādānaṁ,  
vaggo tena pavuccatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.123-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA240]] | S iv 129 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.110]], [[SA240]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.123]]
> ◄  [[sn35.122-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.124-pali-sc]] ►
