---
sutta_code: "SN35.122"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṁyojaniyadhammasutta "
  - "Things That Fetter"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.122]]
> ◄  [[sn35.121-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.123-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XII. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation — SN35.122: Things Prone to Being Fettered
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the things that are prone to being fettered, and the fetter. Listen …

What are the things that are prone to being fettered? And what is the fetter? There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are called the things that are prone to being fettered. The desire and greed for them is the fetter. There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are called the things that are prone to being fettered. The desire and greed for them is the fetter.”

1"Saṁyojaniye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi saṁyojanañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyā dhammā, katamañca saṁyojanaṁ? Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyā dhammā. Yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha saṁyojanaṁ … pe … santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyā dhammā. Yo tattha chandarāgo taṁ tattha saṁyojanan"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.122-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA239]] | S iv 129 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.109]], [[SA239]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.122]]
> ◄  [[sn35.121-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.123-pali-sc]] ►
