---
sutta_code: "SN35.150"
sutta_title:
  - "Nibbānasappāyapaṭipadāsutta "
  - "Suitable for Attaining Nibbāna (4)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.150]]
> ◄  [[sn35.149-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.151-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XV. The Old and the New — SN35.150: A Practice Conducive to Extinguishment
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you a practice that’s conducive to extinguishment. Listen …

And what is that practice that’s conducive to extinguishment?

What do you think, bhikkhus? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?”


2“Impermanent, sir.”

3“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

4“Suffering, sir.”

5“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and liable to fall apart, is it fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

6“No, sir.”


7“Are sights … eye consciousness … eye contact …

8“Impermanent, sir.”


9The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?”


10“Impermanent, sir.”

11“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

12“Suffering, sir.”


13“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and liable to fall apart, is it fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

14“No, sir.”


15Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact. They grow disillusioned with the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. …

They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’

This is that practice that’s conducive to extinguishment.”

1"Nibbānasappāyaṁ vo, bhikkhave, paṭipadāṁ desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha … pe …

katamā ca sā, bhikkhave, nibbānasappāyā paṭipadā?

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, cakkhu niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


2"Aniccaṁ, bhante".

3"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vā taṁ sukhaṁ vā"ti?

4"Dukkhaṁ, bhante".

5"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ, kallaṁ nu taṁ samanupassituṁ: ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’"ti?

6"No hetaṁ, bhante".


7"Rūpā niccā vā aniccā vā"ti?

8"Aniccā, bhante".


9"Cakkhuviññāṇaṁ … cakkhusamphasso … pe … yampidaṁ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


10"Aniccaṁ, bhante".

11"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vā taṁ sukhaṁ vā"ti?

12"Dukkhaṁ, bhante".


13"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ, kallaṁ nu taṁ samanupassituṁ: ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’"ti?

14"No hetaṁ, bhante".


15"Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati, rūpesupi nibbindati, cakkhuviññāṇepi nibbindati, cakkhusamphassepi nibbindati … pe … yampidaṁ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tasmimpi nibbindati. Nibbindaṁ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyāti pajānāti.

Ayaṁ kho sā, bhikkhave, nibbānasappāyā paṭipadā"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.150-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA220]] | S iv 148 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA220]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.150]]
> ◄  [[sn35.149-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.151-pali-sc]] ►
