---
sutta_code: "SN35.103"
sutta_title:
  - "Udakasutta "
  - "Uddaka"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.103]]
> ◄  [[sn35.102-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.104-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### X. The Sixes — SN35.103: About Uddaka
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, Uddaka, son of Rāma, used to say: ‘This for sure is the knowledge master! This for sure is the conqueror of all! This for sure is the boil’s root dug out, never dug out before!’

Even though Uddaka, son of Rāma, was no knowledge master, he said ‘I’m a knowledge master.’ Though he was no conqueror of all, he said ‘I’m conqueror of all.’ And though the boil’s root was not dug out, he said ‘I’ve dug out the boil’s root.’

Here’s how a bhikkhu would rightly say: ‘Here’s the thing: the knowledge master! Here’s the thing: the conqueror of all! Here’s the thing: the boil’s root has been dug out, which was never dug out before!’

2And how is someone a knowledge master? It’s when a bhikkhu truly understands the six fields of contact’s origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. That’s how a bhikkhu is a knowledge master.

3And how is a bhikkhu a conqueror of all? It’s when a bhikkhu comes to be freed by not grasping after truly understanding these six sense fields’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. That’s how a bhikkhu is a conqueror of all.


4And how has a bhikkhu dug out the boil’s root, which was never dug out before? ‘Boil’ is a term for this body made up of the four primary elements, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. ‘Boil’s root’ is a term for craving. It’s when a bhikkhu has given up craving, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. That’s how a bhikkhu has dug out the boil’s root, which was never dug out before.


5Uddaka, son of Rāma, used to say: ‘This for sure is the knowledge master! This for sure is the conqueror of all! This for sure is the boil’s root dug out, never dug out before!’

Even though Uddaka, son of Rāma, was no knowledge master, he said ‘I’m a knowledge master.’ Though he was no conqueror of all, he said ‘I’m conqueror of all.’ And though the boil’s root was not dug out, he said ‘I’ve dug out the boil’s root.’

But that’s how a bhikkhu would rightly say: ‘This for sure is the knowledge master! This for sure is the conqueror of all! This for sure is the boil’s root dug out, never dug out before!’”


1"Udako sudaṁ, bhikkhave, rāmaputto evaṁ vācaṁ bhāsati: ‘idaṁ jātu vedagū, idaṁ jātu sabbajī, idaṁ jātu apalikhataṁ gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhaṇin’ti.

Taṁ kho panetaṁ, bhikkhave, udako rāmaputto avedagūyeva samāno ‘vedagūsmī’ti bhāsati, asabbajīyeva samāno ‘sabbajīsmī’ti bhāsati, apalikhataṁyeva gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhataṁ me ‘gaṇḍamūlan’ti bhāsati.

Idha kho taṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammā vadamāno vadeyya: ‘idaṁ jātu vedagū, idaṁ jātu sabbajī, idaṁ jātu apalikhataṁ gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhaṇin’ti.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, vedagū hoti? Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti; evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vedagū hoti.

3Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabbajī hoti? Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ viditvā anupādāvimutto hoti; evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabbajī hoti.


4Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno apalikhataṁ gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhataṁ hoti? Gaṇḍoti kho, bhikkhave, imassetaṁ cātumahābhūtikassa kāyassa adhivacanaṁ mātāpettikasambhavassa odanakummāsūpacayassa aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaṁsanadhammassa. Gaṇḍamūlanti kho, bhikkhave, taṇhāyetaṁ adhivacanaṁ. Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno taṇhā pahīnā hoti ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṁ anup pāda dhammā; evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno apalikhataṁ gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhataṁ hoti.


5Udako sudaṁ, bhikkhave, rāmaputto evaṁ vācaṁ bhāsati: ‘idaṁ jātu vedagū, idaṁ jātu sabbajī, idaṁ jātu apalikhataṁ gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhaṇin’ti.

Taṁ kho panetaṁ, bhikkhave, udako rāmaputto avedagūyeva samāno ‘vedagūsmī’ti bhāsati, asabbajīyeva samāno ‘sabbajīsmī’ti bhāsati; apalikhataṁyeva gaṇḍamūlaṁ ‘palikhataṁ me gaṇḍamūlan’ti bhāsati.

Idha kho taṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammā vadamāno vadeyya: ‘idaṁ jātu vedagū, idaṁ jātu sabbajī, idaṁ jātu apalikhataṁ gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhaṇin’"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Saḷavaggo pañcamo.

6Dve saṅgayhā parihānaṁ,  
Pamādavihārī ca saṁvaro;  
Samādhi paṭisallānaṁ,  
Dve natumhākena uddakoti.

Saḷāyatanavagge dutiyapaṇṇāsako samatto.

7Avijjā migajālañca,  
Gilānaṁ channaṁ catutthakaṁ;  
Saḷavaggena paññāsaṁ,  
Dutiyo paṇṇāsako ayanti.

Paṭhamasatakaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.103-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA114]] | S iv 103 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA114]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35:245AND41:5]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.103]]
> ◄  [[sn35.102-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.104-pali-sc]] ►
