---
sutta_code: "SN35.98"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṁvarasutta "
  - "Restraint"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.98]]
> ◄  [[sn35.97-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.99-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### X. The Sixes — SN35.98: Restraint
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you who is restrained and who is unrestrained. Listen …

And how is someone unrestrained?

There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, they should understand: ‘My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what the Buddha calls decline.’

There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, they should understand: ‘My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what the Buddha calls decline.’

This is how someone is unrestrained.

2And how is someone restrained?

There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they should understand: ‘My skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha calls non-decline.’

There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they should understand: ‘My skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha calls non-decline.’

This is how someone is restrained.”

1"Saṁvarañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, asaṁvarañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, asaṁvaro hoti?

Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati, veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘parihāyāmi kusalehi dhammehi. Parihānañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatā’ti … pe …

Santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati, veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘parihāyāmi kusalehi dhammehi. Parihānañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatā’ti.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, asaṁvaro hoti.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, saṁvaro hoti?

Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati, veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘Na parihāyāmi kusalehi dhammehi. Aparihānañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatā’ti … pe … santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe …

Santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati, veditabbametaṁ bhikkhunā: ‘Na parihāyāmi kusalehi dhammehi. Aparihānañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatā’ti.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, saṁvaro hotī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.98-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 92 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN48.56]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.98]]
> ◄  [[sn35.97-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.99-pali-sc]] ►
