---
sutta_code: "SN35.92"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamadvayasutta "
  - "The Dyad (1)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.92]]
> ◄  [[sn35.91-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.93-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### IX. With Channa — SN35.92: A Duality (1st)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you a duality. Listen …

And what is a duality? It’s just the eye and sights, the ear and sounds, the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touches, and the mind and thoughts. This is called a duality.

2bhikkhus, suppose someone was to say: ‘I’ll reject this duality and describe another duality.’ They’d have no grounds for that, they’d be stumped by questions, and, in addition, they’d get frustrated. Why is that? Because they’re out of their element.”

1"Dvayaṁ vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha.

Kiñca, bhikkhave, dvayaṁ? Cakkhuñceva rūpā ca, sotañceva saddā ca, ghānañceva gandhā ca, jivhā ceva rasā ca, kāyo ceva phoṭṭhabbā ca, mano ceva dhammā ca – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dvayaṁ.

2Yo, bhikkhave, evaṁ vadeyya: ‘ahametaṁ dvayaṁ paccakkhāya aññaṁ dvayaṁ paññapessāmī’ti, tassa vācāvatthukamevassa. Puṭṭho ca na sampāyeyya. Uttariñca vighātaṁ āpajjeyya. Taṁ kissa hetu? Yathā taṁ, bhikkhave, avisayasmin"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.92-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA273]] | S iv 89 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA273]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.23]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.92]]
> ◄  [[sn35.91-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.93-pali-sc]] ►
