---
sutta_code: "SN35.110"
sutta_title:
  - "Upādāniyasutta "
  - "Things That Can Be Clung To"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.110]]
> ◄  [[sn35.109-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.111-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XI. Sanctuary — SN35.110: Things Prone to Being Grasped
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the things that are prone to being grasped, and the grasping. Listen …

What are the things that are prone to being grasped? And what is the grasping? The eye is something that’s prone to being grasped. The desire and greed for it is the grasping. The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is something that’s prone to being grasped. The desire and greed for it is the grasping. These are called the things that are prone to being grasped, and this is the grasping.”

1"Upādāniye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi upādānañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā, katamañca upādānaṁ? Cakkhuṁ, bhikkhave, upādāniyo dhammo. Yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha upādānaṁ … pe … jivhā upādāniyo dhammo … pe … mano upādāniyo dhammo. Yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha upādānaṁ. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā, idaṁ upādānan"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.110-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA240]] | S iv 110 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA240]], [[SN35.123]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.110]]
> ◄  [[sn35.109-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.111-pali-sc]] ►
