---
sutta_code: "SN35.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyābhinandasutta "
  - "Delight (2)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.2]]
> ◄  [[sn35.1-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.3-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### I. Impermanence — SN35.2: The Interior as Suffering
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, the eye is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

The ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

1"Cakkhuṁ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ. Yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Sotaṁ dukkhaṁ … pe … ghānaṁ dukkhaṁ … jivhā dukkhā … kāyo dukkho … mano dukkho. Yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyāti pajānātī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA195]] | S iv 2 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA195]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.2]]
> ◄  [[sn35.1-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn35.3-pali-sc]] ►
