---
sutta_code: "SN43.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Kāyagatāsatisutta "
  - "Mindfulness Directed to the body"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN43]]  / 🌐 [[SN43.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn43.2-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 43. Asaṅkhatasaṁyutta: On the Unconditioned

### I. The First Chapter — SN43.1: Mindfulness of the Body
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the unconditioned and the path that leads to the unconditioned. Listen …

And what is the unconditioned? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is called the unconditioned.

And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? Mindfulness of the body. This is called the path that leads to the unconditioned.

2So, bhikkhus, I’ve taught you the unconditioned and the path that leads to the unconditioned. Out of compassion, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice jhāna, bhikkhus! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction to you.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Asaṅkhatañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi asaṅkhatagāmiñca maggaṁ. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, asaṅkhataṁ? Yo, bhikkhave, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, asaṅkhataṁ.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, asaṅkhatagāmimaggo? Kāyagatāsati. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, asaṅkhatagāmimaggo.

2Iti kho, bhikkhave, desitaṁ vo mayā asaṅkhataṁ, desito asaṅkhatagāmimaggo. Yaṁ, bhikkhave, satthārā karaṇīyaṁ sāvakānaṁ hitesinā anukampakena anukampāṁ upādāya, kataṁ vo taṁ mayā. Etāni, bhikkhave, rukkhamūlāni, etāni suññāgārāni. Jhāyatha, bhikkhave, mā pamādattha; mā pacchā vippaṭisārino ahuvattha. Ayaṁ vo amhākaṁ anusāsanī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn43.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 359 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN43]]  / 🌐 [[SN43.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn43.2-sujato-pali]] ►
