---
sutta_code: "SN14.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Vedanānānattasutta "
  - "Diversity of Feelings (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.4]]
> ◄  [[sn14.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.5-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 14. Dhātusaṁyutta: On the Elements

### I. Diversity — SN14.4: Diversity of Feelings
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings. And what is the diversity of elements?

The eye element, ear element, nose element, tongue element, body element, and mind element. This is called the diversity of elements.

2And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings? The eye element gives rise to eye contact. Eye contact gives rise to the feeling born of eye contact. … The mind element gives rise to mind contact. Mind contact gives rise to the feeling born of mind contact.

That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ Sāvatthiyaṁ

"Dhātunānattaṁ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattaṁ.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ? Cakkhudhātu … pe … manodhātu – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattaṁ? Cakkhudhātuṁ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati cakkhusamphasso, cakkhusamphassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati cakkhusamphassajā vedanā … pe … manodhātuṁ paṭicca uppajjati manosamphasso, manosamphassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati manosamphassajā vedanā.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattan"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA452-453]] | S ii 141 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA452-453]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.4]]
> ◄  [[sn14.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.5-sujato-pali]] ►
