---
sutta_code: "SN14.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Phassanānattasutta "
  - "Diversity of Contacts"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.2]]
> ◄  [[sn14.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.3-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 14. Dhātusaṁyutta: On the Elements

### I. Diversity — SN14.2: Diversity of Contacts
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts. And what is the diversity of elements? The eye element, ear element, nose element, tongue element, body element, and mind element. This is called the diversity of elements.

2And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts? The eye element gives rise to eye contact. The ear element … nose … tongue … body … The mind element gives rise to mind contact. That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ Sāvatthiyaṁ

"Dhātunānattaṁ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ. Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ? Cakkhudhātu sotadhātu ghānadhātu jivhādhātu kāyadhātu manodhātu – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ? Cakkhudhātuṁ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati cakkhusamphasso. Sotadhātuṁ paṭicca … ghānadhātuṁ paṭicca … jivhādhātuṁ paṭicca … kāyadhātuṁ paṭicca … manodhātuṁ paṭicca uppajjati manosamphasso. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattan"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA452-453]] | S ii 140 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA452-453]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.2]]
> ◄  [[sn14.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.3-sujato-pali]] ►
