---
sutta_code: "SN14.16"
sutta_title:
  - "Sagāthāsutta "
  - "With Verses"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.16]]
> ◄  [[sn14.15-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.17-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 14. Dhātusaṁyutta: On the Elements

### II. The Second Chapter — SN14.16: With Verses
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have a bad attitude come together and converge with those who have a bad attitude. In the past …


2In the future …


3At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have a bad attitude come together and converge with those who have a bad attitude.

4It’s like how dung comes together with dung, urine with urine, spit with spit, pus with pus, and blood with blood. In the same way, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have a bad attitude come together and converge with those who have a bad attitude. In the past … In the future … At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have a bad attitude come together and converge with those who have a bad attitude.

5Sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have a good attitude come together and converge with those who have a good attitude. In the past …

6In the future … At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have a good attitude come together and converge with those who have a good attitude.

7It’s like how milk comes together with milk, oil with oil, ghee with ghee, honey with honey, and molasses with molasses. In the same way, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have a good attitude come together and converge with those who have a good attitude. In the past … In the future … At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have a good attitude come together and converge with those who have a good attitude.”


8That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

9“Socializing promotes entanglement;  
they’re cut off by being aloof.  
If you’re lost in the middle of a great sea,  
and you clamber up on a little log, you’ll sink.

10So too, a person who lives well  
sinks by relying on a lazy person.  
Hence you should avoid such  
a lazy person who lacks energy.

11Dwell with the noble ones  
who are secluded and determined  
and always energetic;  
the astute who practice jhāna.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ Sāvatthiyaṁ

""Dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṁsandanti samenti. Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandanti samenti. Atītampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṁ dhātusova sattā saṁsandiṁsu samiṁsu. Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandiṁsu samiṁsu.


2Anāgatampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṁ dhātusova sattā saṁsandissanti samessanti. Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandissanti samessanti.


3Etarahipi kho, bhikkhave, paccuppannaṁ addhānaṁ dhātusova sattā saṁsandanti samenti. Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandanti samenti.

4Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gūtho gūthena saṁsandati sameti; muttaṁ muttena saṁsandati sameti; kheḷo kheḷena saṁsandati sameti; pubbo pubbena saṁsandati sameti; lohitaṁ lohitena saṁsandati sameti; evameva kho, bhikkhave, dhātusova sattā saṁsandanti samenti. Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandanti samenti. Atītampi kho addhānaṁ … pe … anāgatampi kho addhānaṁ … pe … etarahipi kho paccuppannaṁ addhānaṁ dhātusova sattā saṁsandanti samenti. Hīnādhimuttikā hīnādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandanti samenti.

5Dhātusova, bhikkhave, sattā saṁsandanti samenti. Kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandanti samenti. Atītampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṁ dhātusova sattā saṁsandiṁsu samiṁsu. Kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandiṁsu samiṁsu.

6Anāgatampi kho, bhikkhave, addhānaṁ … pe … etarahipi kho, bhikkhave, paccuppannaṁ addhānaṁ dhātusova sattā saṁsandanti samenti. Kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandanti samenti.

7Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, khīraṁ khīrena saṁsandati sameti; telaṁ telena saṁsandati sameti; sappi sappinā saṁsandati sameti; madhu madhunā saṁsandati sameti; phāṇitaṁ phāṇitena saṁsandati sameti; evameva kho, bhikkhave, dhātusova sattā saṁsandanti samenti. Kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandanti samenti. Atītampi kho addhānaṁ … anāgatampi kho addhānaṁ … etarahipi kho paccuppannaṁ addhānaṁ dhātusova sattā saṁsandanti samenti. Kalyāṇādhimuttikā kalyāṇādhimuttikehi saddhiṁ saṁsandanti samentī"ti.


8Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 

9"Saṁsaggā vanatho jāto,  
asaṁsaggena chijjati;  
Parittaṁ dārumāruyha,  
yathā sīde mahaṇṇave.

10Evaṁ kusītamāgamma,  
sādhujīvipi sīdati;  
Tasmā taṁ parivajjeyya,  
kusītaṁ hīnavīriyaṁ.

11Pavivittehi ariyehi,  
pahitattehi jhāyīhi;  
Niccaṁ āraddhavīriyehi,  
paṇḍitehi sahāvase"ti.


Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.16-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA446]], [[SA448]] | S ii 157 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[THAG2]].14, [[THAG3]].16, [[SA446]], [[SA448]], [[ITI78]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.16]]
> ◄  [[sn14.15-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.17-sujato-pali]] ►
