---
sutta_code: "SN14.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Dhātunānattasutta "
  - "Diversity of Elements"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn14.2-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 14. Dhātusaṁyutta: On the Elements

### I. Diversity — SN14.1: Diversity of Elements
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the diversity of elements. Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.”

“Yes, sir,” they replied. The Buddha said this:

2“And what is the diversity of elements? The eye element, sight element, and eye consciousness element. The ear element, sound element, and ear consciousness element. The nose element, smell element, and nose consciousness element. The tongue element, taste element, and tongue consciousness element. The body element, touch element, and body consciousness element. The mind element, thought element, and mind consciousness element. This is called the diversity of elements.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ Sāvatthiyaṁ

"Dhātunānattaṁ vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha, sādhukaṁ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etadavoca: 

2"Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ? Cakkhudhātu rūpadhātu cakkhuviññāṇadhātu, sotadhātu saddadhātu sotaviññāṇadhātu, ghānadhātu gandhadhātu ghānaviññāṇadhātu, jivhādhātu rasadhātu jivhāviññāṇadhātu, kāyadhātu phoṭṭhabbadhātu kāyaviññāṇadhātu, manodhātu dhammadhātu manoviññāṇadhātu – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattan"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA451]] | S ii 140 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN115]], [[SA451]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn14.2-sujato-pali]] ►
