---
sutta_code: "SN14.36"
sutta_title:
  - "Up pāda sutta "
  - "Arising"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.36]]
> ◄  [[sn14.35-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.37-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 14. Dhātusaṁyutta: On the Elements

### IV. The Fourth Chapter — SN14.36: Arising
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the earth element is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the water element … The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the fire element … The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the air element is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death.

2The cessation, settling, and ending of the earth element is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending of the water element … The cessation, settling, and ending of the fire element … The cessation, settling, and ending of the air element is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Yo, bhikkhave, pathavīdhātuyā uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo rogānaṁ ṭhiti jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. Yo āpodhātuyā … pe … yo tejodhātuyā … yo vāyodhātuyā uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo rogānaṁ ṭhiti jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo.

2Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, pathavīdhātuyā nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho rogānaṁ vūpasamo jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. Yo āpodhātuyā … pe … yo tejodhātuyā … yo vāyodhātuyā nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho rogānaṁ vūpasamo jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.36-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S ii 175 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.17]], [[SN35.18]], [[SN35.19]], [[SN35.20]], [[SN35.21]], [[SN35.22]], [[SN35.23]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.36]]
> ◄  [[sn14.35-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.37-sujato-pali]] ►
