---
sutta_code: "SN14.32"
sutta_title:
  - "Acariṁsutta "
  - "I Set Out"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.32]]
> ◄  [[sn14.31-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.33-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 14. Dhātusaṁyutta: On the Elements

### IV. The Fourth Chapter — SN14.32: In Search of Gratification
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I went in search of the earth element’s gratification, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of gratification in the earth element. I went in search of the earth element’s drawback, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of the drawback in the earth element. I went in search of escape from the earth element, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of escape from the earth element.


2I went in search of the water element’s gratification … I went in search of the fire element’s gratification … I went in search of the air element’s gratification …


3As long as I didn’t truly understand these four elements’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.


4But when I did truly understand the four elements’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: ‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there are no more future lives.’”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Pathavīdhātuyāhaṁ, bhikkhave, assādapariyesanaṁ acariṁ, yo pathavīdhātuyā assādo tadajjhagamaṁ, yāvatā pathavīdhātuyā assādo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. Pathavīdhātuyāhaṁ, bhikkhave, ādīnavapariyesanaṁ acariṁ, yo pathavīdhātuyā ādīnavo tadajjhagamaṁ, yāvatā pathavīdhātuyā ādīnavo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. Pathavīdhātuyāhaṁ, bhikkhave, nissaraṇapariyesanaṁ acariṁ, yaṁ pathavīdhātuyā nissaraṇaṁ tadajjhagamaṁ, yāvatā pathavīdhātuyā nissaraṇaṁ paññāya me taṁ sudiṭṭhaṁ.


2Āpodhātuyāhaṁ, bhikkhave … pe … tejodhātuyāhaṁ, bhikkhave … vāyodhātuyāhaṁ, bhikkhave, assādapariyesanaṁ acariṁ, yo vāyodhātuyā assādo tadajjhagamaṁ, yāvatā vāyodhātuyā assādo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. Vāyodhātuyāhaṁ, bhikkhave, ādīnavapariyesanaṁ acariṁ, yo vāyodhātuyā ādīnavo tadajjhagamaṁ, yāvatā vāyodhātuyā ādīnavo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. Vāyodhātuyāhaṁ, bhikkhave, nissaraṇapariyesanaṁ acariṁ, yaṁ vāyodhātuyā nissaraṇaṁ tadajjhagamaṁ, yāvatā vāyodhātuyā nissaraṇaṁ paññāya me taṁ sudiṭṭhaṁ.


3Yāvakīvañcāhaṁ, bhikkhave, imāsaṁ catunnaṁ dhātūnaṁ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṁ na abbhaññāsiṁ, neva tāvāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya anuttaraṁ sammāsambodhiṁ abhisambuddhoti paccaññāsiṁ.


4Yato ca khvāhaṁ, bhikkhave, imāsaṁ catunnaṁ dhātūnaṁ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṁ abbhaññāsiṁ, athāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya anuttaraṁ sammāsambodhiṁ abhisambuddhoti paccaññāsiṁ.

Ñāṇañca pana me dassanaṁ udapādi: ‘akuppā me vimutti, ayamantimā jāti, natthi dāni punabbhavo’"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.32-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S ii 171 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.17]], [[SN35.18]], [[SN35.19]], [[SN35.20]], [[SN35.21]], [[SN35.22]], [[SN35.23]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.32]]
> ◄  [[sn14.31-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.33-sujato-pali]] ►
