---
sutta_code: "SN14.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Sattadhātusutta "
  - "Seven Elements"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.11]]
> ◄  [[sn14.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.12-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 14. Dhātusaṁyutta: On the Elements

### II. The Second Chapter — SN14.11: Seven Elements
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, there are these seven elements. What seven? The element of light, the element of beauty, the element of the dimension of infinite space, the element of the dimension of infinite consciousness, the element of the dimension of nothingness, the element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, and the element of the cessation of perception and feeling. These are the seven elements.”


2When he said this, one of the bhikkhus asked the Buddha: “Sir, due to what does each of these elements appear?”

3“bhikkhu, the element of light appears due to the element of darkness. The element of beauty appears due to the element of ugliness. The element of the dimension of infinite space appears due to the element of form. The element of the dimension of infinite consciousness appears due to the element of the dimension of infinite space. The element of the dimension of nothingness appears due to the element of the dimension of infinite consciousness. The element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception appears due to the element of the dimension of nothingness. The element of the cessation of perception and feeling appears due to the element of cessation.”

4“Sir, how is each of these elements to be attained?”

5“The elements of light, beauty, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness, and the dimension of nothingness are attainments with perception. The element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception is an attainment with only a residue of conditioned phenomena. The element of the cessation of perception and feeling is an attainment of cessation.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ Sāvatthiyaṁ

""Sattimā, bhikkhave, dhātuyo. Katamā satta? abhadhātu, subhadhātu, ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu, viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu, ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu, saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu – imā kho, bhikkhave, satta dhātuyo"ti.


2Evaṁ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "yā cāyaṁ, bhante, abhadhātu yā ca subhadhātu yā ca ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu yā ca viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu yā ca ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu yā ca nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu yā ca saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu – imā nu kho, bhante, dhātuyo kiṁ paṭicca paññāyantī"ti?

3"Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, abhadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu andhakāraṁ paṭicca paññāyati. Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, subhadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu asubhaṁ paṭicca paññāyati. Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu rūpaṁ paṭicca paññāyati. Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu ākāsānañcāyatanaṁ paṭicca paññāyati. Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu viññāṇañcāyatanaṁ paṭicca paññāyati. Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ paṭicca paññāyati. Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu nirodhaṁ paṭicca paññāyatī"ti.

4"Yā cāyaṁ, bhante, abhadhātu yā ca subhadhātu yā ca ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu yā ca viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu yā ca ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu yā ca nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu yā ca saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu – imā nu kho, bhante, dhātuyo kathaṁ samāpatti pattabbā"ti?

5"Yā cāyaṁ, bhikkhu, abhadhātu yā ca subhadhātu yā ca ākāsānañcāyatanadhātu yā ca viññāṇañcāyatanadhātu yā ca ākiñcaññāyatanadhātu – imā dhātuyo saññāsamāpatti pattabbā. Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu saṅkhārāvasesasamāpatti pattabbā. Yāyaṁ, bhikkhu, saññāvedayitanirodhadhātu – ayaṁ dhātu nirodhasamāpatti pattabbā"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA456]] | S ii 149 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA456]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DN15 AND MN137]], [[AN9.36]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.11]]
> ◄  [[sn14.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.12-sujato-pali]] ►
