---
sutta_code: "SN14.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyavedanānānattasutta "
  - "Diversity of Feelings (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.5]]
> ◄  [[sn14.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.6-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 14. Dhātusaṁyutta: On the Elements

### I. Diversity — SN14.5: Diversity of Feelings (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts. Diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings. Diversity of feelings doesn’t give rise to diversity of contacts. Diversity of contacts doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.

And what is the diversity of elements? The eye element, ear element, nose element, tongue element, body element, and mind element. This is called the diversity of elements.

2And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts give rise to diversity of feelings, while diversity of feelings doesn’t give rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements?

The eye element gives rise to eye contact. Eye contact gives rise to feeling born of eye contact. Feeling born of eye contact doesn’t give rise to eye contact. Eye contact doesn’t give rise to the eye element. … The mind element gives rise to mind contact. Mind contact gives rise to feeling born of mind contact. Feeling born of mind contact doesn’t give rise to mind contact. Mind contact doesn’t give rise to the mind element.

That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings, while diversity of feelings doesn’t give rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ Sāvatthiyaṁ

"Dhātunānattaṁ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattaṁ, no vedanānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, no phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattaṁ.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ? Cakkhudhātu … pe … manodhātu – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattaṁ, no vedanānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, no phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattaṁ?

Cakkhudhātuṁ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati cakkhusamphasso, cakkhusamphassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati cakkhusamphassajā vedanā, no cakkhusamphassajaṁ vedanāṁ paṭicca uppajjati cakkhusamphasso, no cakkhusamphassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati cakkhudhātu … pe … manodhātuṁ paṭicca uppajjati manosamphasso, manosamphassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati manosamphassajā vedanā, no manosamphassajaṁ vedanāṁ paṭicca uppajjati manosamphasso, no manosamphassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati manodhātu.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattaṁ, no vedanānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, no phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhātunānattan"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn14.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA452-453]] | S ii 142 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA452-453]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN14]]  / 🌐 [[SN14.5]]
> ◄  [[sn14.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn14.6-sujato-pali]] ►
