---
sutta_code: "MN141"
sutta_pts: "M iii 248"
sutta_title:
  - "Saccavibhaṅga Sutta "
  - "Analysis of the Truths"
nikaya:
  - "MN "
  - "Majjhima Nikāya"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MN141-152"
  - "Vibhaṅgavagga"
  - "Analysis"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Noble Truths"
  - "Noble Path"
sutta_topic:
  - "4 Noble Truths"
  - "Noble path detailed"
sutta_training:
  - "Sīla"
  - "Samādhi"
  - "Paññā"
sutta_stage:
  - "Intro"
  - "Beginning"
  - "Middle"
  - "End"
  - "Final"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - "4 jhānas"
  - "Noble Eightfold Path"
sutta_teacher:
  - "Sariputta"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[EA12.1]]; [[EA27.1]]; [[MA31]]; [[MA98]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[DN22]], [[EA27.1]], [[MA31]], [[EA12.1]], [[MA98]], [[MN10]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN140]]  🌐 [[MN142]] ►

# MN141 - Saccavibhaṅga Sutta - Analysis of the Truths
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> Expanding on the Buddha ’s first sermon, venerable Sāriputta gives a detailed explanation of the four noble truths.

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> The fully awakened Buddha  rolled forth the supreme wheel of dhamma. It is the teaching, advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing of the four noble truths.”
The noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering:     right view: knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering, right thought: thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.   right speech: refraining from lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, and talking nonsense. right action? Refraining From killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct
> 
> The noble truth of suffering: rebirth, old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; not getting what you wish for. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering.  the noble truth of the origin of suffering:  is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence.  the  noble truth of the cessation of suffering? It’s The fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over
Right livelihood? It’s When a noble disciple earns a living by right livelihood. right effort? It’s When a bhikkhu generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise, that have arisen are given up. so that skillful qualities arise  and are completed by development. right mindfulness: observing an aspect of the body, feelings … mind … principles keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. right samadhi are 4 jhanas
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn141-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA12.1]]; [[EA27.1]]; [[MA31]]; [[MA98]] | M iii 248 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DN22]], [[EA27.1]], [[MA31]], [[EA12.1]], [[MA98]], [[MN10]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA31]], [[MN117]], [[DN22]], [[SN12.20]], [[SN56.11]], [[AN3.134]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN141%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMN141%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN141%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN141%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Amn141-%20-file%3A%22MN140%22%20-file%3A%22MN142%22%20-file%3A%22MN141%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/mn141/en/sujato
> - Dhamma Gift: https://dhamma.gift/read/?q=mn141
> - The Buddhas Words: https://thebuddhaswords.net/mn/mn141.html


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN140]]  🌐 [[MN142]] ►
