---
nikaya:
  - "EA"
  - "Ekottara Āgama"
contribution:
  - index
---
#  EA - Ekottara Āgama

### EA24 - T125 - EA24
> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.1]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.1-) - EA 24.1 – 1. The Flag 
>  When sakka, the lord of gods, tries to organize a counterattack against the demons, he is frustrated by his lazy general suvīra. Sakka asks suvīra how one might get what one wants without effort; but suvīra apparently believes sakka can grant any wish he wants. The Buddha  emphasizes that if effort is valuable among the gods, how much more so for bhikkhus.

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.2]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.2-) - EA 24.2 – 2. Bisa 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.3]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.3-) - EA 24.3 – 3. Dharma King 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.4]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.4-) - EA 24.4 – 4. *The Fingernail 
>  A bhikkhu asks whether anything in the aggregates has even the tiniest bit of stability or permanence. The Buddha  answers using the simile of a little dirt under his fingernail

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.5]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.5-) - EA 24.5 – Miraculous Transformations 
>  What are you searching for? Are you looking for happiness in all the wrong places? Are you looking for a lasting, noble happiness?

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.5]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.5-) - EA 24.5 – Miraculous Transformations 
>  What are you searching for? Are you looking for happiness in all the wrong places? Are you looking for a lasting, noble happiness?

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.6]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.6-) - EA 24.6 – The Three Fasting Days 
>  When the sabbath is observed by following the eight precepts, one lives for that day like the perfected ones. Such a sabbath is glorious

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.7]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.7-) - EA 24.7 – 7. Directly Present 
>  How to know a faithful person

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.8]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.8-) - EA 24.8 – 8. Long Life 
>  A second discourse set at the quarrel of kosambi, this depicts the Buddha , having failed to achieve reconciliation between the disputing bhikkhus, leaving the monastery. He spends time in the wilderness before encountering an inspiring community of practicing monks. There he discusses in detail obstacles to meditation that he encountered before awakening

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA24.10]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.10-) - EA 24.10 – 10. Samādhi 
>  For insight, complete understanding, complete ending, giving up, vanishing … fading away … cessation … giving away … letting go into greed, three things should be developed
