---
nikaya:
  - "EA"
  - "Ekottara Āgama"
contribution:
  - index
---
#  EA - Ekottara Āgama

### EA43 - T125 - EA43
> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.1]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.1-) - EA 43.1 – 1. ? 
>  A well-traveled deva learns that we don't have to go to the ends of the world to find an end to suffering; we need look no further than right here, in this very body

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.2]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.2-) - EA 43.2 – 2. ? 
>  Nine factors for a glorious sabbath: the eight precepts and the meditation on love

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.3]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.3-) - EA 43.3 – 3. ? 
>  The Buddha  gives a parable of a large log floating downstream, which, if it steers clear of the many obstacles, will eventually reach the ocean. A cowherd named nanda was listening, and determined to go forth.

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.4]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.4-) - EA 43.4 – 4. ? 
>  Similar to the previous. After the incident with Devadatta, the Buddha  cautions the bhikkhus against becoming complacent and points to liberation as the true heart of the teaching
>  The Buddha  compares the rewards of the practice to different parts of a large tree, with total release the most valuable part of the tree: the heartwood

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.5]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.5-) - EA 43.5 – The Parable of the Raft 
>  The Buddha  tells the story of a wise slave who deliberately tests her mistress's patience. The Buddha  invokes several memorable similes here to illustrate the correct way to develop patience.
>  A discourse full of vibrant and memorable similes, on the importance of patience and love even when faced with abuse and criticism. The Buddha  finishes with the simile of the saw, one of the most memorable similes found in the discourses

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.6]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.6-) - EA 43.6 – 6. ? 
>  Drawing parallels with a cowherd guiding his herd across a dangerous river, the Buddha  presents the various kinds of enlightened disciples who cross the stream of transmigration

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.7]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.7-) - EA 43.7 – The Fruits of the Ascetics 
>  A person fettered internally and one fettered externally

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.8]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.8-) - EA 43.8 – 8. ? 
>  The eight worldly conditions in detail: pain and loss, fame and disgrace, praise and blame, pleasure and pain.

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.9]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.9-) - EA 43.9 – 9. ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[EA43.10]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.10-) - EA 43.10 – 10. ? 
>  Eight kinds of person are worthy
