---
sutta_code: "SN20.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Okkhāsutta "
  - "Pots of Food"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN20]]  / 🌐 [[SN20.4]]
> ◄  [[sn20.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn20.5-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 20. Opammasaṁyutta: With Similes

### I. Similes — SN20.4: Rice Pots
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose one person was to give a gift of a hundred pots of rice in the morning, at midday, and in the evening. And someone else was to develop a heart of love, even just as long as it takes to pull a cow’s udder. The latter would be more fruitful.

So you should train like this: ‘We will develop the heart’s release by love. We’ll cultivate it, make it our vehicle and our basis, keep it up, consolidate it, and properly implement it.’ That’s how you should train.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Yo, bhikkhave, pubbaṇhasamayaṁ okkhāsataṁ dānaṁ dadeyya, yo majjhanhikasamayaṁ okkhāsataṁ dānaṁ dadeyya, yo sāyanhasamayaṁ okkhāsataṁ dānaṁ dadeyya, yo vā pubbaṇhasamayaṁ antamaso gadduhanamattampi mettacittaṁ bhāveyya, yo vā majjhanhikasamayaṁ antamaso gadduhanamattampi mettacittaṁ bhāveyya, yo vā sāyanhasamayaṁ antamaso gadduhanamattampi mettacittaṁ bhāveyya, idaṁ tato mahapphalataraṁ.

Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṁ sikkhitabbaṁ: ‘mettā no cetovimutti bhāvitā bhavissati bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn20.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA1253]] | S ii 264 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA1253]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[ITI27.]], [[AN11.16.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN20]]  / 🌐 [[SN20.4]]
> ◄  [[sn20.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn20.5-sujato-pali]] ►
