---
sutta_code: "SA2_11"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. 14"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SA]]  / 🌐 [[SA2_11]]
> ◄  [[SA2_10]] 📜  [[SA2_15-39]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## [2. The Sense Fields](index.html)

11-14 (195). Impermanent, Painful, Empty, and Not Self
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “Everything is [11] impermanent … [12] painful … [13] empty … [14] not self. How is everything impermanent? It means the eye is impermanent … painful … empty … not self. Whether it’s forms, visual awareness, visual contact, or the painful, pleasant, and neither painful nor pleasant feelings that arise from visual contact, they are impermanent … painful … empty … not self, too. _The ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are likewise._
3. “The well-versed noble disciple who contemplates it in this way becomes disillusioned with the eye. Whether it’s forms, visual awareness, visual contact, or the painful, pleasant, and neither painful nor pleasant feelings that arise from visual contact, they become disillusioned with it. They become disillusioned with the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … sounds … odors … flavors … touches … ideas … [auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and] mental awareness, mental contact, and the painful, pleasant, and neither painful nor pleasant feelings that arise from mental contact, too. Because the disciple becomes disillusioned with them, they don’t enjoy them. Because they don’t enjoy those things, they are liberated. Being liberated, they know and see this: ‘My births have been ended, the religious life has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I myself know that I won’t be subject to another existence.’”
4. After the Buddha spoke this _sūtra_, the bhikkhus who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
_Like this_ sūtra _on impermanence, pain, emptiness, and not self are taught in the same way._

---


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sa2_11-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SA]]  / 🌐 [[SA2_11]]
> ◄  [[SA2_10]] 📜  [[SA2_15-39]] ►
