---
sutta_code: "SA2_1"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. 4"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SA]]  / 🌐 [[SA2_1]]
> ◄  [[SA1_178]] 📜  [[SA2_5]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## [2. The Sense Fields](index.html)

1-4 (188). Impermanent, Painful, Empty, and Not Self
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “You should correctly observe the eye to be [1] impermanent … [2] painful … [3] empty … [4] not self. Observing it in this way is called right view. Because it’s correctly observed, disillusionment arises. Because disillusionment arises, one becomes free of delight and greed. I say one’s mind is correctly liberated because they are free of delight and greed.
3. “_Thus with the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … one becomes free of delight and greed._ bhikkhus, I say one’s mind is correctly liberated because they are free of delight and greed.
4. “Someone who’s mind is correctly liberated can declare about themselves: ‘My births have been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I myself know that I won’t be subject to a later existence.’”
5. After the Buddha spoke this _sūtra_, the bhikkhus who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
6. _Like “impermanence,” “pain,” “emptiness,” and “not self” are taught in the same way._

---


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sa2_1-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SA]]  / 🌐 [[SA2_1]]
> ◄  [[SA1_178]] 📜  [[SA2_5]] ►
