---
sutta_code: "SA2_123"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. 125"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SA]]  / 🌐 [[SA2_123]]
> ◄  [[SA2_97]] 📜  [[SA2_126]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## [2. The Sense Fields](index.html)

123-125 (230). Samṛddhi (1-3)
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. There was then a monk named Samṛddhi who went to the Buddha, bowed his head at the Buddha’s feet, and withdrew to sit at one side. He said to the Buddha, “Bhagavān, there’s the expression [123] ‘the world’ … [124] ‘a sentient being’ … [125] ‘Māra.’ What is it that’s called ‘the world’ … ‘a sentient being’ … ‘Māra’?”
3. The Buddha told Samṛddhi, “It refers to the eye, form, visual awareness, visual contact, feelings that dependently arise from visual contact, and inner experiences that are painful, pleasant, or neither painful nor pleasant. It refers to the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind, ideas, mental awareness, mental contact, feelings that dependently arise from mental contact, and inner experiences that are painful, pleasant, or neither painful nor pleasant. This is called ‘the world’ … ‘a sentient being’ … ‘Māra.’ Why is that? When the six sense fields form, then contact forms … The whole mass of suffering forms in this way.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2]
4. “Samṛddhi, suppose there’s no eye, no form, no visual awareness, no visual contact, no feelings that dependently arise from visual contact, and no inner experiences that are painful, pleasant, or neither painful nor pleasant. There’s no ear … nose … tongue … mind, ideas, mental awareness, mental contact, feelings that dependently arise from mental contact, or inner experiences that are painful, pleasant, or neither painful nor pleasant. Then, there’s no world … no sentient being … no Māra, nor what’s supposed to be the world … a sentient being … Māra. Why is that? When the six sense fields cease, then contact ceases … The whole mass of suffering ceases in this way.”
5. After he spoke this _sūtra_, the bhikkhus who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
6. (_As with the world, a sentient being and Māra are explained in the same way._)

---


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sa2_123-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SA]]  / 🌐 [[SA2_123]]
> ◄  [[SA2_97]] 📜  [[SA2_126]] ►
