---
sutta_code: "MN80"
sutta_pts: "M ii 40"
sutta_title:
  - "Vekhanasa Sutta "
  - "With Vekhanasa"
nikaya:
  - "MN "
  - "Majjhima Nikāya"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MN71-80"
  - "Paribbājakavagga"
  - "Ascetics"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Pleasures"
  - "Awakening"
sutta_topic:
  - "Pleasures"
  - "Sensual"
  - "Teachings"
  - "Goal of"
sutta_training:
  - "Paññā"
sutta_stage:
  - "Intro"
sutta_method:
  - "qa"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
sutta_prominence:
  - ""
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Ascetics"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[MA209]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[MA209]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN79]]  🌐 [[MN81]] ►

# MN80 - Vekhanasa Sutta - With Vekhanasa
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> Starting off similar to the previous, the Buddha  goes on to explain that one is not converted to his teaching just because of clever arguments, but because you see in yourself the results of the practice

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> The pleasure and happiness that arises from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called sensual pleasure
Let a sensible person come—neither devious nor deceitful, a person of integrity. I teach and instruct them. Practicing As instructed they will soon know and see for themselves, ‘so this is how to be rightly released from the bond, that is, the bond of ignorance
> 
> Who has a different view, creed, preference, practice, and teacher’s doctrine, to understand the senses, sensual pleasure, and the best kind of sensual pleasure.
 are bhikkhus who are perfected, who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and are rightly freed through enlightenment. They can understandthe senses, sensual pleasure, and the best kind of sensual pleasure
> 

> [!info] Similes
> Baby bound with swaddling up to the neck. As they grow up and their senses mature, they’re accordingly released from those bonds , like someone who practice the Dhamma

---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn80-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA209]] | M ii 40 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA209]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN80%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMN80%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN80%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMN80%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Amn80-%20-file%3A%22MN79%22%20-file%3A%22MN81%22%20-file%3A%22MN80%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/mn80/en/sujato
> - Dhamma Gift: https://dhamma.gift/read/?q=mn80
> - The Buddhas Words: https://thebuddhaswords.net/mn/mn80.html


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MN]] | ◄  [[MN79]]  🌐 [[MN81]] ►
