---
sutta_code: "SN16.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Candūpamāsutta "
  - "Like the Moon"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN16]]  / 🌐 [[SN16.3]]
> ◄  [[sn16.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn16.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 16. Kassapasaṁyutta: With Kassapa

### I. Kassapa — SN16.3: Like the Moon
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, you should approach families like the moon: withdrawn in body and mind, always the newcomer, and never impudent. Suppose a person were to look down at an old well, a rugged cliff, or an inaccessible riverland. They’d withdraw their body and mind. In the same way, you should approach families like the moon: withdrawn in body and mind, always the newcomer, and never impudent.

2Kassapa approaches families like the moon: withdrawn in body and mind, always the newcomer, and never impudent.

What do you think, bhikkhus? What kind of bhikkhu is worthy of approaching families?”

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The bhikkhus will listen and remember it.”

3Then the Buddha waved his hand in space.

“bhikkhus, this hand is not stuck or held or caught in space. In the same way, when approaching families, a bhikkhu’s mind is not stuck or held or caught, thinking: ‘May those who want material possessions get them, and may those who want merit make merits!’ They’re just as pleased and happy when others get something as they are when they get something. This kind of bhikkhu is worthy of approaching families.

4When Kassapa approaches families, his mind is not stuck or held or caught, thinking: ‘May those who want material possessions get them, and may those who want merit make merits!’ He’s just as pleased and happy when others get something as he is when he gets something.

5What do you think, bhikkhus? What kind of bhikkhu’s teaching is pure, and what kind is impure?”

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The bhikkhus will listen and remember it.”

“Well then, bhikkhus, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.”

“Yes, sir,” they replied. The Buddha said this:

6“Whoever teaches Dhamma to others with the thought: ‘Oh! May they listen to the teaching from me. When they’ve heard it, may they gain confidence in the teaching and demonstrate their confidence to me.’ Such a bhikkhu’s teaching is impure.

7Whoever teaches Dhamma to others with the thought: ‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. Oh! May they listen to the teaching from me. When they’ve heard it, may they understand the teaching and practice accordingly.’ So they teach others because of the natural excellence of the teaching, out of compassion, kindness, and sympathy. Such a bhikkhu’s teaching is pure.

8Kassapa teaches Dhamma to others with the thought: ‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. Oh! May they listen to the teaching from me. When they’ve heard it, may they understand the teaching and practice accordingly.’

Thus he teaches others because of the natural excellence of the teaching, out of compassion, kindness, and sympathy. I will exhort you with the example of Kassapa or someone like him. You should practice accordingly.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Candūpamā, bhikkhave, kulāni upasaṅkamatha – apakasseva kāyaṁ, apakassa cittaṁ, niccanavakā kulesu appagabbhā. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso jarudapānaṁ vā olokeyya pabbatavisamaṁ vā nadīviduggaṁ vā – apakasseva kāyaṁ, apakassa cittaṁ; evameva kho, bhikkhave, candūpamā kulāni upasaṅkamatha – apakasseva kāyaṁ, apakassa cittaṁ, niccanavakā kulesu appagabbhā.

2Kassapo, bhikkhave, candūpamo kulāni upasaṅkamati – apakasseva kāyaṁ, apakassa cittaṁ, niccanavako kulesu appagabbho.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, kathaṁrūpo bhikkhu arahati kulāni upasaṅkamitun"ti?

"Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṁnettikā bhagavaṁpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṁyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī"ti.

3Atha kho bhagavā ākāse pāṇiṁ cālesi.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṁ ākāse pāṇi na sajjati na gayhati na bajjhati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, yassa kassaci bhikkhuno kulāni upasaṅkamato kulesu cittaṁ na sajjati na gayhati na bajjhati: ‘labhantu lābhakāmā, puññakāmā karontu puññānī’ti; yathāsakena lābhena attamano hoti sumano, evaṁ paresaṁ lābhena attamano hoti sumano; evarūpo kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu arahati kulāni upasaṅkamituṁ.

4Kassapassa, bhikkhave, kulāni upasaṅkamato kulesu cittaṁ na sajjati na gayhati na bajjhati: ‘labhantu lābhakāmā, puññakāmā karontu puññānī’ti; yathāsakena lābhena attamano hoti sumano; evaṁ paresaṁ lābhena attamano hoti sumano.

5Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, kathaṁrūpassa bhikkhuno aparisuddhā dhammadesanā hoti, kathaṁrūpassa bhikkhuno parisuddhā dhammadesanā hotī"ti?

"Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṁnettikā bhagavaṁpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṁyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī"ti.

"Tena hi, bhikkhave, suṇātha, sādhukaṁ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etadavoca: 

6"Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu evaṁcitto paresaṁ dhammaṁ deseti: ‘aho vata me dhammaṁ suṇeyyuṁ, sutvā ca pana dhammaṁ pasīdeyyuṁ, pasannā ca me pasannākāraṁ kareyyun’ti; evarūpassa kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno aparisuddhā dhammadesanā hoti.

7Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu evaṁcitto paresaṁ dhammaṁ deseti: ‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṁ veditabbo viññūhīti. Aho vata me dhammaṁ suṇeyyuṁ, sutvā ca pana dhammaṁ ājāneyyuṁ, ājānitvā ca pana tathattāya paṭipajjeyyun’ti. Iti dhammasudhammataṁ paṭicca paresaṁ dhammaṁ deseti, kāruññaṁ paṭicca anuddayaṁ paṭicca anukampāṁ upādāya paresaṁ dhammaṁ deseti. Evarūpassa kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno parisuddhā dhammadesanā hoti.

8Kassapo, bhikkhave, evaṁcitto paresaṁ dhammaṁ deseti: ‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṁ veditabbo viññūhīti. Aho vata me dhammaṁ suṇeyyuṁ, sutvā ca pana dhammaṁ ājāneyyuṁ, ājānitvā ca pana tathattāya paṭipajjeyyun’ti. Iti dhammasudhammataṁ paṭicca paresaṁ dhammaṁ deseti, kāruññaṁ paṭicca anuddayaṁ paṭicca anukampāṁ upādāya paresaṁ dhammaṁ deseti.

Kassapena vā hi vo, bhikkhave, ovadissāmi yo vā panassa kassapasadiso, ovaditehi ca pana vo tathattāya paṭipajjitabban"ti.


Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.111]], [[SA1136]] | S ii 197 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.111]], [[SA1136]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN16]]  / 🌐 [[SN16.3]]
> ◄  [[sn16.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn16.4-sujato-pali]] ►
