---
sutta_code: "SN51.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Buddhasutta "
  - "Buddha"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.8]]
> ◄  [[sn51.7-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.9-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 51.8 Buddhasuttaṃ

## SN 51.8 The Discourse on the Buddha

820. ‘‘Cattārome, bhikkhave, iddhipādā. Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhi…pe… cittasamādhi …pe… vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā. Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā tathāgato ‘arahaṃ sammāsambuddho’ti vuccatī’’ti. Aṭṭhamaṃ.

820."Monks, there are these four bases of spiritual power. What four? Here, monks, a monk develops the basis of spiritual power that possesses samādhi of desire and volitional formations of striving; he develops the basis of spiritual power that possesses samādhi of energy… he develops the basis of spiritual power that possesses samādhi of mind… he develops the basis of spiritual power that possesses samādhi of investigation and volitional formations of striving. These, monks, are the four bases of spiritual power. It is because of the development and cultivation of these four bases of spiritual power that the Tathagata is called 'the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One.'" The eighth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 257 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.8]]
> ◄  [[sn51.7-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.9-deepseek-pali]] ►
