---
sutta_code: "SN51.6"
sutta_title:
  - "Samattasutta "
  - "Completely"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.6]]
> ◄  [[sn51.5-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.7-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 51.6 Samattasuttaṃ

## SN 51.6 The Discourse on Completion

818. ‘‘Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādesuṃ, sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādessanti, sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādenti, sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā.

818."Monks, whatever ascetics or brahmins in the past attained complete spiritual power, all of them did so by developing and cultivating the four bases of spiritual power. Monks, whatever ascetics or brahmins in the future will attain complete spiritual power, all of them will do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of spiritual power. Monks, whatever ascetics or brahmins at present are attaining complete spiritual power, all of them do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of spiritual power."

‘‘Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhi…pe… cittasamādhi…pe… vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādesuṃ, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādessanti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samattaṃ iddhiṃ abhinipphādenti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā’’ti. Chaṭṭhaṃ.

"Which four? Here, monks, a monk develops the basis of psychic power that possesses samādhi due to desire and the striving of formations. He develops the basis of psychic power that possesses samādhi due to energy… samādhi due to mind… samādhi due to investigation and the striving of formations. Monks, whatever ascetics or brahmins in the past attained complete spiritual power, all of them did so by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. Whatever ascetics or brahmins in the future will attain complete spiritual power, all of them will do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. Whatever ascetics or brahmins at present attain complete spiritual power, all of them do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power." The sixth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 256 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.6]]
> ◄  [[sn51.5-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.7-deepseek-pali]] ►
