---
sutta_code: "SN51.28"
sutta_title:
  - "DutiyĀnandasutta "
  - "Ānanda (2)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.28]]
> ◄  [[sn51.27-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.29-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 51.28 Dutiyaānandasuttaṃ

## SN 51.28 The Second Ānanda Sutta

840. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ bhagavā etadavoca – ‘‘katamā nu kho, ānanda, iddhi, katamo iddhipādo, katamā iddhipādabhāvanā, katamā iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā’’ti? Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā…pe….

840.Then the Blessed One said to Venerable Ānanda, who was seated to one side: “Ānanda, what is spiritual power, what is the basis of spiritual power, what is the development of the basis of spiritual power, and what is the practice leading to the development of the basis of spiritual power?” “Venerable sir, our teachings have the Blessed One as their root, are guided by the Blessed One…”

‘‘Idhānanda, bhikkhu anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhoti – ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti…pe… yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vatteti – ayaṃ vuccatānanda, iddhi.

“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu experiences various kinds of spiritual power: having been one, he becomes many… he wields mastery with the body as far as the Brahma world. This, Ānanda, is called spiritual power.”

‘‘Katamo cānanda, iddhipādo? Yo, ānanda, maggo yā paṭipadā iddhilābhāya iddhipaṭilābhāya saṃvattati – ayaṃ vuccatānanda, iddhipādo.

“And what, Ānanda, is the basis of spiritual power? It is, Ānanda, the path, the practice that leads to the gaining of spiritual power, to the attainment of spiritual power. This, Ānanda, is called the basis of spiritual power.”

‘‘Katamā cānanda, iddhipādabhāvanā? Idhānanda, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhi…pe… cittasamādhi…pe… vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti – ayaṃ vuccatānanda, iddhipādabhāvanā.

“And what, Ānanda, is the development of the basis of spiritual power? Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu develops the basis of spiritual power possessed of samādhi due to zeal and the volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis of spiritual power possessed of samādhi due to energy and the volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis of spiritual power possessed of samādhi due to mind and the volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis of spiritual power possessed of samādhi due to investigation and the volitional formations of striving. This, Ānanda, is called the development of the basis of spiritual power.”

‘‘Katamā cānanda, iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ – sammādiṭṭhi…pe… sammāsamādhi – ayaṃ vuccatānanda, iddhipādabhāvanāgāminī paṭipadā’’ti. Aṭṭhamaṃ.

“And what, Ānanda, is the practice leading to the development of the basis of spiritual power? It is just this Noble Eightfold Path, namely: right view…right samādhi. This, Ānanda, is called the practice leading to the development of the basis of spiritual power.” The eighth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.28-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 286 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.28]]
> ◄  [[sn51.27-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.29-deepseek-pali]] ►
