---
sutta_code: "SN51.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Iddhipadesasutta "
  - "In Part"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.5]]
> ◄  [[sn51.4-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.6-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 51.5 Iddhipadesasuttaṃ

## SN 51.5 The Discourse on the Basis for Spiritual Power

817. ‘‘Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā iddhipadesaṃ abhinipphādesuṃ sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā iddhipadesaṃ abhinipphādessanti sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā iddhipadesaṃ abhinipphādenti sabbe te catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā.

817.“Monks, whatever ascetics or brahmins in the past realized the basis for spiritual power, all of them did so by developing and cultivating the four bases for spiritual power. Whatever ascetics or brahmins in the future will realize the basis for spiritual power, all of them will do so by developing and cultivating the four bases for spiritual power. Whatever ascetics or brahmins in the present are realizing the basis for spiritual power, all of them do so by developing and cultivating the four bases for spiritual power.

‘‘Katamesaṃ catunnaṃ? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhi…pe… cittasamādhi…pe… vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā iddhipadesaṃ abhinipphādesuṃ, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā iddhipadesaṃ abhinipphādessanti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā iddhipadesaṃ abhinipphādenti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā’’ti. Pañcamaṃ.

Which four? Here, monks, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi of zeal, accompanied by volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi of energy, accompanied by volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi of mind, accompanied by volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi of investigation, accompanied by volitional formations of striving. Monks, whatever ascetics or brahmins in the past realized the basis for spiritual power, all of them did so by developing and cultivating these same four bases for spiritual power. Whatever ascetics or brahmins in the future will realize the basis for spiritual power, all of them will do so by developing and cultivating these same four bases for spiritual power. Whatever ascetics or brahmins in the present are realizing the basis for spiritual power, all of them do so by developing and cultivating these same four bases for spiritual power.” The fifth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 255 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.5]]
> ◄  [[sn51.4-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.6-deepseek-pali]] ►
