---
sutta_code: "SN51.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Viraddhasutta "
  - "Neglected"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.2]]
> ◄  [[sn51.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.3-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 51.2 Viraddhasuttaṃ

## SN 51.2 The Discourse on Neglect

814. ‘‘Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhi…pe… cittasamādhi…pe… vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime cattāro iddhipādā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. Yesaṃ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime cattāro iddhipādā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṃ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī’’ti. Dutiyaṃ.

814.“For whomever, monks, the four bases for spiritual power are neglected, for them the noble path leading to the complete destruction of suffering is neglected. For whomever, monks, the four bases for spiritual power are undertaken, for them the noble path leading to the complete destruction of suffering is undertaken. Which four? Here, monks, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi of zeal, accompanied by volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi of energy, accompanied by volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi of mind, accompanied by volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi of investigation, accompanied by volitional formations of striving. For whomever, monks, these four bases for spiritual power are neglected, for them the noble path leading to the complete destruction of suffering is neglected. For whomever, monks, these four bases for spiritual power are undertaken, for them the noble path leading to the complete destruction of suffering is undertaken.” The second.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 254 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.2]]
> ◄  [[sn51.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.3-deepseek-pali]] ►
