---
sutta_code: "SN51.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Apārasutta "
  - "From the Near Shore"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn51.2-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 51.1 Apārasuttaṃ

## SN 51.1 The Discourse on the Far Shore

813. ‘‘Cattārome bhikkhave, iddhipādā bhāvitā bahulīkatā apārā pāraṃ gamanāya saṃvattanti. Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, cittasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti, vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā bhāvitā bahulīkatā apārā pāraṃ gamanāya saṃvattantī’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.

813.“Monks, these four bases for spiritual power, when developed and cultivated, lead to going from this shore to the far shore. What four? Here, monks, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power endowed with samādhi due to desire and with the volitional formations of exertion. He develops the basis for spiritual power endowed with samādhi due to energy and with the volitional formations of exertion. He develops the basis for spiritual power endowed with samādhi due to mind and with the volitional formations of exertion. He develops the basis for spiritual power endowed with samādhi due to investigation and with the volitional formations of exertion. These, monks, are the four bases for spiritual power that, when developed and cultivated, lead to going from this shore to the far shore.” The first.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA29.7]] | S v 254 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA29.7]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn51.2-deepseek-pali]] ►
