---
sutta_code: "SN21.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Kolitasutta "
  - "Kolita"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn21.2-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 21.1 Kolitasuttaṃ

## SN 21.1 The Kolita Discourse

235. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Tatra kho āyasmā mahāmoggallāno bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘āvuso bhikkhave’’ti. ‘‘Āvuso’’ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato mahāmoggallānassa paccassosuṃ.

235.Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. There the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the bhikkhus, saying: “Friends, bhikkhus!” “Friends,” those bhikkhus replied to the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna.

Āyasmā mahāmoggallāno etadavoca – ‘‘idha mayhaṃ, āvuso, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi – ‘ariyo tuṇhībhāvo, ariyo tuṇhībhāvoti vuccati. Katamo nu kho ariyo tuṇhībhāvo’ti? Tassa mayhaṃ āvuso, etadahosi – ‘idha bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Ayaṃ vuccati ariyo tuṇhībhāvo’ti. So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja vihariṃ. Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, iminā vihārena viharato vitakkasahagatā saññā manasikārā samudācaranti’’.

The Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said: “Here, friends, while I was secluded and withdrawn, this thought arose in my mind: ‘The noble silence, the noble silence is spoken of. What then is this noble silence?’ Then, friends, this occurred to me: ‘Here, a bhikkhu, with the subsiding of applied thought and sustained thought, with internal assurance and unification of mind, enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which is without applied thought and sustained thought, born of samādhi, with rapture and pleasure. This is called the noble silence.’ So, friends, I entered and dwelled in the second jhāna, with the subsiding of applied thought and sustained thought, with internal assurance and unification of mind, without applied thought and sustained thought, born of samādhi, with rapture and pleasure. While I was dwelling in this state, perceptions and attention accompanied by applied thought arose.”

‘‘Atha kho maṃ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca – ‘moggallāna, moggallāna, mā, brāhmaṇa, ariyaṃ tuṇhībhāvaṃ pamādo, ariye tuṇhībhāve cittaṃ saṇṭhapehi, ariye tuṇhībhāve cittaṃ ekodibhāvaṃ karohi, ariye tuṇhībhāve cittaṃ samādahā’ti. So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, aparena samayena vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. Yañhi taṃ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya – ‘satthārā anuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṃ patto’ti, mamaṃ taṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya – ‘satthārā anuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṃ patto’’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.

“Then, friends, the Blessed One approached me by means of psychic power and said: ‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna, brahmin, do not be heedless of the noble silence! Establish your mind in the noble silence, make your mind one-pointed in the noble silence, concentrate your mind in the noble silence.’ So, friends, at a later time, with the subsiding of applied thought and sustained thought, with internal assurance and unification of mind, I entered and dwelled in the second jhāna, which is without applied thought and sustained thought, born of samādhi, with rapture and pleasure. If anyone, speaking rightly, were to say: ‘A disciple has attained great direct knowledge through the Teacher’s assistance,’ it is of me that one, speaking rightly, should say: ‘A disciple has attained great direct knowledge through the Teacher’s assistance.’” End of the First Discourse.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA501]] | S ii 273 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA501]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN40.2]], [[SN41.6]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn21.2-deepseek-pali]] ►
