---
sutta_code: "MA103"
sutta_title:
  - "師子吼 "
  - "Lion's Roar"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA103]]
> ◄  [[ma102-bdk]] 📜  [[ma104-bdk]] ►

### 103. The Discourse on the Lion's Roar

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying among the Kurus, at a Kuru town called Kammāsadhamma. At that time the World-honored One addressed the bhikkhus:

When you are among assemblies, you can roar a true lion’s roar like this: “In this [dispensation] there is a first[-level] renunciant, a second[- level],... a third[-level],... and a fourth[-level] renunciant.^271 Outside of this [dispensation] there is no [true] renunciant or brahmin; all heterodox paths [of practice] are devoid of [true] renunciants and brahmins.” bhikkhus, suppose that heterodox practitioners come and ask you, “Ven- erable friends, what is the [mode of] practice, what is the power, what is the knowledge that you have, by virtue of which you make such a procla- mation when you are among assemblies, roaring a true lion’s roar like this: ‘In this [dispensation] there is a first[-level] renunciant, a second[- level],... a third[-level],... and a fourth[-level] renunciant. Outside of this [dispensation] there is no [true] renunciant or brahmin; all heterodox paths [of practice] are devoid of [true] renunciants and brahmins’?” bhikkhus, you should reply to those heterodox practitioners like this: “Ven- erable friends, our World-honored One is endowed with knowledge and vision, he is a tathāgata, free of attachment, fully awakened. He has declared four principles, and it is because of these four principles that we make such a proclamation when among assemblies, roaring a true lion’s roar like this: ‘In this [dispensation] there is a first[-level] renunciant, a second[-level],... a third[-level],... and a fourth[-level] renunciant. Outside of this [dispen- sation] there is no [true] renunciant or brahmin; all heterodox paths [of practice] are devoid of [true] renunciants and brahmins.’ “What are the four [principles]? Venerable friends, we have faith in the teacher; we have faith in the teaching; we have faith in, and are endowed with, the virtues of the precepts; and we feel affection and respect toward companions on the path, revering and supporting them. “Venerable friends, our World-honored One, who is endowed with knowledge and vision, who is a tathāgata, free of attachment, fully awak- ened, has declared these four principles, and it is because of these four principles that we make such a proclamation when among assemblies, roaring a true lion’s roar like this: “In this [dispensation] there is a first[- level] renunciant, a second[-level],... a third[-level],... and a fourth[- level] renunciant. Outside of this [dispensation] there is no [true] renunciant or brahmin; all heterodox paths [of practice] are devoid of [true] renunciants and brahmins.”

bhikkhus, suppose that the heterodox practitioners reply like this, “Venerable friends, we too have faith in the teacher, that is to say, in our teacher; we have faith in the teaching, that is to say, in our teaching; we are endowed with the virtue of the precepts, that is to say, our precepts; and we feel affec tion and respect toward companions on the path, revering and supporting them, that is to say, companions on our path, both those who have gone forth and those who remain in the household. “Venerable friends, regarding these two dispensations, that of the renun ciant Gotama and that of ourselves, what is superior [or inferior], what is their significance, and what are the differences?” bhikkhus, you should ask the heterodox practitioners this: “Venerable friends, is there a single final goal or are there many final goals?” bhikkhus, if the heterodox practitioners reply like this, “Venerable friends, there is a single final goal; there are not many final goals,” then, bhikkhus, ask the heterodox practitioners further, “Venerable friends, is the final goal attained by one who has sensual desires or is the final goal attained by one who is without sensual desires?” bhikkhus, if the heterodox practitioners reply like this, “Venerable friends, the final goal is to be attained by one who is without sensual desires; the final goal is not attained by one who has sensual desires,” then, bhikkhus, ask the heterodox practitioners further: “Venerable friends, is the final goal attained by one who has ill-will or is the final goal attained by one who is without ill-will?” bhikkhus, if the heterodox practitioners reply like this, “Venerable friends, the final goal is attained by one who is without ill-will; the final goal is not attained by one who has ill-will,” then, bhikkhus, ask the heterodox prac titioners further: “Venerable friends, is the final goal attained by one who has delusion or is the final goal attained by one who is without delusion?” bhikkhus, if the heterodox practitioners reply like this, “Venerable friends, the final goal is attained by one who is without delusion; the final goal is not attained by one who has delusion,” then, bhikkhus, ask the heterodox practitioners further: “Venerable friends, is the final goal attained by one who has craving and clinging, or is the final goal attained by one who is without craving and clinging?”^272

bhikkhus, if the heterodox practitioners reply like this, “Venerable friends, the final goal is attained by one who is without craving and clinging; the final goal is not attained by one who has craving and clinging,” then, bhikkhus, ask the heterodox practitioners further: “Venerable friends, is the final goal attained by one who is without wisdom and does not speak wisely, or is the final goal attained by one who has wisdom and speaks wisely?” bhikkhus, if the heterodox practitioners reply like this, “Venerable friends, the final goal is attained by one who has wisdom and speaks wisely; the final goal is not attained by one who is without wisdom and does not speak wisely,” then, bhikkhus, ask the heterodox practitioners further, “Venerable friends, is the final goal attained by one who is hostile and disputatious, or is the final goal attained by one who is not hostile and not disputatious?” bhikkhus, if the heterodox practitioners reply like this, “Venerable friends, the final goal is attained by one who is not hostile and not disputatious; the final goal is not attained by one who is hostile and disputatious,” then, bhikkhus, say this to the heterodox practitioners: “Venerable friends, accord- ing to what you have said, there is a single final goal; there are not many final goals. The final goal is attained by one who is without sensual desires; the final goal is not attained by one who has sensual desires. “The final goal is attained by one who is without ill-will; the final goal is not attained by one who has ill-will. The final goal is attained by one who is without delusion; the final goal is not attained by one who has delusion. The final goal is attained by one who is without craving and clinging; the final goal is not attained by one who has craving and clinging. “The final goal is attained by one who has wisdom and speaks wisely; the final goal is not attained by one who is without wisdom and does not speak wisely. The final goal is attained by one who is not hostile and not disputatious; the final goal is not attained by one who is hostile and disputatious.” If renunciants and brahmins incline to countless views, then they all incline to two [basic] views: the view of existence and the view of nonex- istence. If they incline to the view of existence, then they are attached to the view of existence, rely on the view of existence, take their stand on the view of existence, and dispute with [those who hold] the view of

nonexistence. If they incline to the view of nonexistence, then they are attached to the view of nonexistence, rely on the view of nonexistence, take their stand on the view of nonexistence, and dispute with [those who hold] the view of existence. Renunciants and brahmins who do not know the cause [of these two views], who do not know their arising, do not know their cessation, do not know the gratification in them, do not know the danger in them, and do not know the escape from them—they all have sensual desire, they have ill-will and delusion, they have craving, they have clinging, they are without wisdom and do not speak wisely, and they are hostile and dispu tatious. Consequently, they do not become free from birth, old age, disease, and death and are unable to liberate themselves from worry and woe, weeping and tears, sorrow and pain, distress and vexation; they do not attain the ending of dukkha. Renunciants and brahmins who do know the cause of these [two] views, who know their arising, know their cessation, know the gratification in them, know the danger in them, and know the escape from them—they all are without sensual desire, without ill-will, without delusion, without craving, without clinging, they have wisdom and speak wisely, and they are not hostile and not disputatious. They attain freedom from birth, old age, disease, and death, and are able to liberate themselves from worry and woe, weeping and tears, sorrow and pain, distress and vexation; con sequently, they attain the ending of dukkha. There may be renunciants and brahmins who declare the abandoning of clinging but do not declare the abandoning of all [types of] clinging. They declare the abandoning of clinging to sensual pleasures but they do not declare the abandoning of clinging to rules, clinging to views, and clinging to a self.^273 Why is that? Those renunciants and brahmins do not know these three instances [of clinging] as they really are; consequently, although they declare the aban doning of clinging, they do not declare the abandoning of all [types of] clinging. Again, there are renunciants and brahmins who declare the abandoning of clinging but do not declare the abandoning of all [types of] clinging. [They] declare the abandoning of clinging to sensual pleasures and of

clinging to rules but they do not declare the abandoning of clinging to views and of clinging to a self. Why is that? Those renunciants and brahmins do not know these two instances [of clinging] as they really are; consequently, although they declare the abandoning of clinging, they do not declare the abandoning of all [types of] clinging. Again, there are renunciants and brahmins who declare the abandoning of clinging but do not declare the abandoning of all [types] of clinging. They declare the abandoning of clinging to sensual pleasures, of clinging to rules, and of clinging to views but they do not declare the abandoning of clinging to a self. Why is that? Those renunciants and brahmins do not know this one instance [of clinging] as it really is; consequently, although they declare the abandoning of clinging, they do not declare the abandoning of all [types of] clinging. In such a teaching and discipline, if someone has faith in the teacher, that is not appropriate and does not [lead to the] highest; if someone has faith in the teaching, that too is not appropriate and does not [lead to the] highest; if someone is endowed with the virtue of the precepts, that too is not appropriate and does not [lead to the] highest; if someone feels affection and respect toward companions on the path, revering and supporting them, that too is not appropriate and does not [lead to the] highest. A tathāgata appears in the world, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, a leader on the path of Dharma, a teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one. He declares the abandoning of clinging, declaring here and now the abandoning of all [types] of clinging. He declares the abandoning of cling- ing to sensual pleasures, of clinging to rules, of clinging to views, and of clinging to a self. What is the cause of these four [types] of clinging? From what do they arise? From where are they born? What is their source? These four [types] of clinging are caused by ignorance, they arise [because] of ignorance, they are born from ignorance, and they have ignorance as their source.^274 If a monk has eradicated ignorance and given rise to knowledge, then he thereafter ceases clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to rules, clinging

to views, and clinging to a self. Not clinging, he is not agitated; being without agitation and having abandoned its cause and condition, he is cer tain to attain final nirvana, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” In such a true Dharma and discipline, if someone has faith in the teacher, that is appropriate and [leads to the] highest; if someone has faith in the teaching, that is appropriate and [leads to the] highest; if someone is endowed with the virtues of the precepts, that is appropriate and [leads to the] highest; if someone feels affection and respect towards companions on the path, revering and supporting them, that is appropriate and [leads to the] highest. Venerable friends, this is the [mode of] practice, this is the power, this is the knowledge we have, by virtue of which we make such a proclamation when we are among assemblies, roaring a true lion’s roar like this: “In this [dispensation] there is a first[-level] renunciant, a second[-level],... a third[-level],... and a fourth[-level] renunciant. Outside of this [dispen sation] there is no [true] renunciant or brahmin; all heterodox paths [of practice] are devoid of [true] renunciants and brahmins.”^275 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma103-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA27.2]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[JA547]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.239]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA103]]
> ◄  [[ma102-bdk]] 📜  [[ma104-bdk]] ►
