---
sutta_code: "MA115"
sutta_title:
  - "鞞摩那修 "
  - "With Vekhanasa"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA115]]
> ◄  [[ma114-bdk]] 📜  [[ma116-bdk]] ►

### 115. The Discourse with the Simile of the Honeyball

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu. Then the World-honored One, at dawn, when the night was over, having put on his robes and taken his bowl, went into Kapilavatthu to beg for almsfood. After having partaken of the midday meal, he put away his robe and bowl

and washed his hands and feet. With his sitting mat over his shoulder he went to a Sakyan shrine in a bamboo grove. Entering the great forest, he spread his mat under a tree and sat down cross-legged. Then the Sakyan Daṇḍapāṇi, leaning on a staff, came by on his afternoon walk. He approached the Buddha and they exchanged greetings. Leaning on his staff, he stood before the Buddha and asked the World-honored One, “Renun- ciant Gotama, what is the basis of your dispensation? What do you teach?” The World-honored One answered: Sakyan, [my teaching] is not to quarrel with anyone in the entire world— _deva_ s, _māra_ s, Brahmās, renunciants, and brahmins, from human beings to _deva_ s—to practice the pure holy life secluded from sensual desires,^339 abandon hypocrisy, cut off worries, and not be attached to existence, nonexistence, or nonperception. This is the basis of my dispensation, this is what I teach. When the Sakyan Daṇḍapāṇi heard what the Buddha said, he neither agreed nor disagreed. Shaking his head, the Sakyan Daṇḍapāṇi left. Not long after the Sakyan Daṇḍapāṇi had left, in the late afternoon, the World-honored One rose from sitting in meditation and went to the assembly hall. He sat on a seat prepared in front of the sangha of bhikkhus and addressed the bhikkhus:

This morning I put on my robes and took my bowl and went into Kapila vatthu to beg for almsfood. Having partaken of the midday meal, I put away my robes and bowl and washed my hands and feet. With my sitting mat over my shoulder I went to a Sakyan shrine in a bamboo grove. Enter ing the great forest, I spread my sitting mat under a tree and sat down cross-legged. Then the Sakyan Daṇḍapāṇi, leaning on a staff, came by on his afternoon walk. He approached me and we exchanged greetings. Leaning on his staff, he stood before me and asked, “Renunciant Gotama, what is the basis of your dispensation? What do you teach?” I answered, “Sakyan, [my teaching] is not to quarrel with anyone in the entire world— deva s, māra s, Brahmās, renunciants, and brahmins, from human beings to deva s—to practice the pure holy life secluded from sensual desires, abandon hypocrisy, cut off

worries, and not be attached to existence, nonexistence, or nonperception: this is the basis of my dispensation, this is what I teach.” When the Sakyan Daṇḍapāṇi heard what I said, he neither agreed nor disagreed. Shaking his head, the Sakyan Daṇḍapāṇi left. Then one of the bhikkhus rose from his seat, arranged his robe to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha, and said:

World-honored One, what is meant by “not to quarrel with anyone in the entire world— _deva_ s, _māra_ s, Brahmās, renunciants, and brahmins, from human beings to _deva_ s—to practice the pure holy life secluded from sen- sual desires, abandon hypocrisy, cut off worries, and not be attached to existence, nonexistence, or nonperception”? The World-honored One said: Monk, suppose that a person, with a [corresponding] reflection as the cause, leaves the household life to train in the path. With intention and perception he practices not desiring past, future, and present phenomena, not rejoicing in them, not becoming attached to them, and not dwelling on them.^340 This is called the end of _dukkha,_ [namely, the end of] the underlying tendency to desire, the underlying tendency to hatred, the underlying ten- dency to existence, the underlying tendency to conceit, the underlying tendency to ignorance, the underlying tendency to views, and the under- lying tendency to doubt. [This is called the end of] quarrel, resentment, flattery, deceit, false speech, divisive speech, and innumerable evil and unwholesome states—this is called the end of _dukkha._ Having said this, the Buddha rose from his seat and went into his dwelling to sit in meditation. Then the bhikkhus thought:

Venerable friends, you should know that the World-honored One has risen from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, having spoken about this matter in brief, without explaining its details, [namely,] “Suppose that a person, with a [corresponding] reflection as the cause, leaves the household life to train in the path. With intention and perception he practices not desiring past, future, and present phenomena, not rejoicing in them, not becoming attached to them, and not dwelling on them.

“This is called the end of _dukkha,_ [namely, the end of] the underlying tendency to desire, the underlying tendency to hatred, the underlying ten- dency to existence, the underlying tendency to conceit, the underlying tendency to ignorance, the underlying tendency to views, and the under- lying tendency to doubt. [This is called the end of] quarrel, resentment, flattery, deceit, false speech, divisive speech, and innumerable evil and unwholesome states—this is called the end of _dukkha._ ” They further thought, “Venerable friends, who would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief?” They further thought:

Venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World-honored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. Venerable Mahākaccāna would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief. Venerable friends, let us together approach Venerable Mahākaccāna and request him to explain this matter. As Venerable Mahākaccāna explains it, so we will remember it well. Thereupon the bhikkhus approached Venerable Mahākaccāna. Having exchanged greetings, they stepped back, sat to one side, and said:

Venerable Mahākaccāna, please know that the World-honored One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, having spoken on this matter in brief without explaining the details, [namely,] “bhikkhus, suppose that a person, with a [corresponding] reflection as the cause, leaves the household life to train in the path. With intention and perception he practices not desiring past, future, and present phenomena, not rejoicing in them, not becoming attached to them, and not dwelling on them. “This is called the end of dukkha, [namely the end of] the underlying tendency to desire, the underlying tendency to hatred, the underlying ten dency to existence, the underlying tendency to conceit, the underlying tendency to ignorance, the underlying tendency to views, and the under lying tendency to doubt. [This is called the end of] quarrel, resentment, flattery, deceit, false speech, divisive speech, and innumerable evil and unwholesome states—this is called the end of dukkha. ”

Then we had this thought, “Venerable friends, who would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief?” We further thought, “Venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World-honored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. Venerable Mahākaccāna would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief.” May Ven erable Mahākaccāna, out of compassion, teach us in detail! Then Venerable Mahākaccāna said: Venerable friends, listen while I tell you a simile. On hearing a simile wise people understand the meaning. Venerable friends, it is as if a man wishing to obtain heartwood, searches for it. In search of heartwood he enters the forest, carrying an axe. He sees a great tree possessing roots, branches, joints, twigs, leaves, flowers, and heartwood. That man does not take hold of the roots, branches, joints, and heartwood but only takes hold of the twigs and leaves. Venerable friends, what you have said is just like that. The World-hon ored One was present yet you left him and come to ask me about this mat ter. Why is that? Venerable friends, you should know that the World-hon ored One is the eye, is knowledge, is meaning, is the Dharma, is the master of the Dharma, is the general of the Dharma. The teaching of this right meaning, the revelation of all meaning, comes from the World-honored One. Venerable friends, you should have approached the World-honored One himself to ask about this matter, saying, “World-honored One, how is this? What is the meaning of this?” As the World-honored One taught it, so, venerable friends, you should have remembered it. Then the bhikkhus said: Yes, indeed, Venerable Mahākaccāna, the World-honored One is the eye, is knowledge, is meaning, is the Dharma, is the master of the Dharma, is the general of the Dharma. The teaching of this right meaning, the reve lation of all meaning, comes from the World-honored One. We should have approached the World-honored One to ask about this matter, saying, “World-honored One, how is this? What is the meaning of this?” As the World-honored One taught it, so we should have remembered it well.

However, Venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World-hon- ored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. Venerable Mahākac- cāna will be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-hon- ored One said in brief. May Venerable Mahākaccāna explain it in detail, out of compassion!

Venerable Mahākaccāna addressed the bhikkhus:

Venerable friends, listen together to what I say. Venerable friends, in depend- ence on the eye and forms, eye consciousness arises. The coming together of these three things is contact. In dependence on contact there is feeling. If there is feeling, there is perception; if there is perception, there is intention; if there is intention, there is thought; if there is thought, there is differen- tiation.^341 A monk, having gone forth to train in the path with such a [cor- responding] reflection as the cause, with intention and perception practices not desiring past, future, and present phenomena, not rejoicing in them, not becoming attached to them, and not dwelling on them. This is called the end of _dukkha,_ [namely, the end of] the underlying tendency to desire, the underlying tendency to hatred, the underlying ten- dency to existence, the underlying tendency to conceit, the underlying tendency to ignorance, the underlying tendency to views, and the under- lying tendency to doubt. [This is called the end of] quarrel, resentment, flattery, deceit, false speech, divisive speech, and countless evil and unwholesome states—this is called the end of _dukkha._ In the same way for the ear... nose... tongue... body... in depend- ence on the mind and mental objects, mind consciousness arises. The coming together of these three things is contact. In dependence on contact there is feeling. If there is feeling, there is perception; if there is perception, there is intention; if there is intention, there is thought; if there is thought, there is differentiation. A monk, having gone forth to train in the path with such a [corresponding] reflection as the cause, with intention and perception practices not desiring past, future, and present phenomena, not rejoicing in them, not becoming attached to them and not dwelling on them. This is called the end of _dukkha,_ [namely, the end of] the underlying tendency to desire, the underlying tendency to hatred, the underlying ten- dency to existence, the underlying tendency to conceit, the underlying

tendency to ignorance, the underlying tendency to views, and the under lying tendency to doubt. [This is called the end of] quarrel, resentment, flattery, deceit, false speech, divisive speech, and countless evil and unwholesome states—this is called the end of dukkha. Venerable friends, without the eye, without forms, and without eye con sciousness, the existence of contact and the manifestation of contact for a monk are not possible. If contact does not manifest, the existence of feeling and the manifestation of feeling are not possible. If feeling does not manifest, the existence and manifestation of thought, intention, and perception of a practititioner, gone forth and training in the path, are not possible. In the same way for the ear... nose... tongue... body... without the mind, without mental objects, without mind consciousness, the existence of con tact and the manifestation of contact are not possible. If contact does not manifest, the existence of feeling and the manifestation of feeling are not possible. If feeling does not manifest, the existence and manifestation of thought, intention, and perception of a practitioner, gone forth and training in the path, are not possible.^342 [On the other hand], venerable friends, because of the eye, because of forms, because of eye consciousness, the existence of contact and the man ifestation of contact for a monk are certainly possible. If contact manifests, the existence of feeling and the manifestation of feeling are certainly pos sible. If feeling manifests, the existence and manifestation of thought, inten tion, and perception of a practitioner, gone forth and training in the path, are certainly possible. In the same way for the ear... nose... tongue... body... because of the mind, because of mental objects, because of mind consciousness, the existence of contact and the manifestation of contact are certainly possible. If contact manifests, the existence of feeling and the manifestation of feeling are certainly possible. If feeling manifests, the existence and manifestation of thought, intention, and perception of a practitioner, gone forth and training in the path, are certainly possible. Venerable friends, the World-honored One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, having spoken on this matter in brief without explaining the details, [thus:] “bhikkhus, suppose that a person, with a [corresponding] reflection as the cause, leaves the household life to train in the path. With intention and perception he practices not desiring

past, future, and present phenomena, not rejoicing in them, not becoming attached to them, and not dwelling on them. “This is called the end of _dukkha,_ [namely, the end of] the underlying tendency to desire, the underlying tendency to hatred, the underlying ten- dency to existence, the underlying tendency to conceit, the underlying tendency to ignorance, the underlying tendency to views, and the under- lying tendency to doubt. [This is called the end of] quarrel, resentment, flattery, deceit, false speech, divisive speech, and countless evil and unwholesome states—this is called the end of _dukkha._ ” What the World-honored One spoke of only in brief without explaining the details, I have explained in detail in this way, employing these phrases and words. Venerable friends, approach the Buddha and set out [my expla- nation] in full [to him]. As the World-honored One explains its meaning, venerable friends, you should remember it! Then, having heard what Venerable Mahākaccāna had said, bearing well in mind [how] to recite it, the bhikkhus rose from their seats, circumambulated Venerable Mahākaccāna three times, and left. They approached the Buddha. Having paid homage to him, they stepped back, sat to one side, and said:

World-honored One, the instruction that the World-honored One gave in brief without explaining its meaning in detail, after which he rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation—Venerable Mahākac cāna has explained it to us in detail employing these phrases and words. Having heard this, the World-honored One expressed praise: It is well, it is well! My disciple is endowed with the eye, with knowledge, with Dharma, with meaning. Why is that? [Because] in regard to this matter which the teacher taught to his disciples in brief, without explaining its details, that disciple has taught it in detail employing these phrases and words. You should remember it like this, [just] as the monk Mahākaccāna has taught it. Why is that? According to this explanation, so you should contemplate the meaning. bhikkhus, it is as if someone, due to dwelling in a secluded place, in the mountains or a forest, were to suddenly obtain a ball of honey. Whichever part of it he eats, he gets the taste of it. In the same way, a clansman in

my true Dharma and discipline, whichever part of it he contemplates, he gets the taste of it: Contemplating the eyes he gets the taste, contemplating the ears... nose... tongue... body... contemplating the mind he gets the taste.^343 At that time Venerable Ānanda was fanning the Buddha. Then Venerable Ānanda extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha and said, “World-honored One, what is the name of this teaching? How should we remember it?” The World-honored One said, “Ānanda, the name of this teaching is ‘the simile of the honeyball.’ Thus you should remember it.” Then the World-honored One told the bhikkhus: Having received this teaching with the simile of the honeyball, you should learn it and recite it. Why is that? bhikkhus, the teaching with the simile of the honeyball is meaningful. It is the root of the holy life. It leads toward the path,^344 toward awakening, toward nirvana. If clansmen shave off their hair and beards, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path, they should remember well this simile of the honeyball. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Ānanda and the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma115-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA40.10]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SNP3.3]], [[]], [[THAG21]].1, [[PE3]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN3.72]], [[DN21]], [[SA273]], [[SN4.8]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA115]]
> ◄  [[ma114-bdk]] 📜  [[ma116-bdk]] ►
