---
sutta_code: "MA116"
sutta_title:
  - "瞿曇彌 "
  - "Spoken to Gotamī"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA116]]
> ◄  [[ma115-bdk]] 📜  [[ma117-bdk]] ►

### 116. The Discourse Spoken to Gotamī

Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was staying among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Nigrodhārāma, where he spent the rains retreat with a large number of bhikkhus. At that time Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī went to the Buddha, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, stood back to one side, and said: World-honored One, are women able to attain the fourth fruit of a renun ciant? Will women therefore be allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline?^346 The World-honored One told her: Desist! Desist, Gotamī! Do not think this: “Women will be allowed to

leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline.” Gotamī, shave off your hair like this, wear the yellow robe, and for the rest of your life practice the holy life in purity. At this, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, having been refused by the Buddha, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. At that time the bhikkhus were mending the Buddha’s robes, [thinking,] “The World-honored One will soon end his rains retreat among the Sakyans. The robes are mended and the three months have passed. [Soon] he will collect his robes, take his bowl, and wander among the people.” Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī heard that the bhikkhus were mending the Buddha’s robes [thinking,] “The World-honored One will soon end his rains retreat among the Sakyans. The robes are mended and the three months have passed. [Soon] he will collect his robes, take his bowl, and wander among the people.” Having heard this, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī went to the Buddha, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, stood back to one side, and said:

World-honored One, are women able to attain the fourth fruit of a renun- ciant? Will women therefore be allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline? The World-honored One again told her: Desist! Desist, Gotamī! Do not think this: “Women will be allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline.” Gotamī, shave off your hair like this, wear the yellow robe, and for the rest of your life practice the holy life in purity. At this Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, having again been refused by the Buddha, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. Then the World-honored One concluded his rains retreat among the Sakyans. The robes had been mended and the three months had passed. He gathered up his robes, took his bowl, and went journeying among the people. Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, accompanied by some elder women of the Sakyan clan, followed in pursuit of the Buddha, who traveled in stages until he arrived at Nādika and stayed in the Giñjakāvasatha Hall.^347 At that time Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī went to the Buddha, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, stood back to one side and said:

World-honored One, are women able to attain the fourth fruit of a renun ciant? Will women therefore be allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline? A third time the World-honored One told her: Desist! Desist, Gotamī! Do not think this: “Women will be allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline.” Gotamī, shave off your hair like this, wear the yellow robe, and for the rest of your life practice the holy life in purity. Thereupon Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, having been refused by the Buddha for a third time, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. Then Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī stood outside the entrance crying in great sor row, all covered in dirt, her bare feet muddied and soiled [from the journey]. Venerable Ānanda, on seeing Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī standing outside crying in great sorrow, all covered in dirt, her bare feet muddied and soiled, asked, “Gotamī, why are you standing outside the entrance crying in great sorrow, all covered in dirt, your bare feet muddied and soiled?” Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī answered, “Venerable Ānanda, [it is because] women are not allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline.” Venerable Ānanda said, “Gotamī, wait here. I will go to the Buddha to speak to him about this matter.” Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī said, “Yes indeed, Venerable Ānanda.” Thereupon, Venerable Ānanda went to the Buddha [and] paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet. He extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha and said: World-honored One, are women able to attain the fourth fruit of a renun ciant? Will women therefore be allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline? The World-honored One told him: Desist! Desist, Ānanda! Do not think this: “Women will be allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma

and discipline.” Ānanda, if women are allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, the holy life will not last long. Ānanda, it is just as in a family with many females and few males: will this family prosper?

Venerable Ānanda said, “No, World-honored One.” [The World-honored One said:]

In the same way, Ānanda, if women are allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, the holy life will not last long. Ānanda, it is just as in rice fields and wheat fields: if weeds grow, the fields will be ruined. In the same way, Ānanda, if women are allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, the holy life will not last long.^348

Venerable Ānanda said further:

World-honored One, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī has greatly benefited the World- honored One. Why is that? After the World-honored One’s mother died, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī raised the World-honored One.^349

The World-honored One said:

It is like this, Ānanda, it is like this, Ānanda. Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī greatly benefited me; she raised me after my mother died. But, Ānanda, I have also greatly benefited Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī. Why is that? Ānanda, because of me Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī took refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, has no doubts about these three things worthy of respect, and [has no doubts about the four truths of] _dukkha,_ its arising, its ending, and the path. She is accomplished in faith, upholds the precepts, has wide knowledge, is accomplished in giving, and has attained wisdom. She refrains from killing, having abandoned killing. She refrains from taking what is not given, having abandoned taking what is not given. She refrains from sexual misconduct, having abandoned sexual misconduct. She refrains from false speech, having abandoned false speech. She refrains from intoxicants, having abandoned intoxicants.

Ānanda, if because of another person, someone takes refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, has no doubts about these three things worthy of respect, and [has no doubts about the four truths of] dukkha, its arising, its ending, and the way to it, is accomplished in faith, upholds the precepts, has wide knowledge, is accomplished in giving, and has attained wisdom; [if that person] refrains from killing, having abandoned killing; refrains from taking what is not given, having abandoned taking what is not given; refrains from sexual misconduct, having abandoned sexual misconduct; refrains from false speech, having abandoned false speech; refrains from intoxicants, having abandoned intoxicants—then, Ānanda, even if one were to make offerings to that person with clothes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, and medicine, all the req uisites of life, for the rest of one’s life, one could not repay this favor. Ānanda, for women I will now lay down eight rules of respect, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Ānanda, just as a fisherman or his apprentice may build a dike in deep water to keep the water in and not let it flow out, in the same way, Ānanda, I now lay down eight rules of respect, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. What are these eight? Ānanda, a nun should seek full ordination from the bhikkhus. Ānanda, this is the first rule of respect that I lay down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives.^350 Ānanda, a nun should seek instruction every half-month from the bhikkhus. Ānanda, this is the second rule of respect that I lay down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Ānanda, a nun is not allowed to spend the rains retreat in an area where there are no bhikkhus. Ānanda, this is the third rule of respect that I lay down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Ānanda, when a nun has completed the rains retreat, she should ask in both assemblies about three things: seeking about what has been seen, what has been heard, and what has been suspected. Ānanda, this is the fourth rule of respect that I lay down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives.

Ānanda, if a monk has not given a nun permission to ask about the dis- courses, the discipline, or the Abhidharma, then that nun is not allowed to ask him about them. [Only] if he gives her permission to ask about the discourses, the discipline, or the Abhidharma is she allowed to ask. Ānanda, this is the fifth rule of respect that I lay down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives.^351 Ānanda, a nun is not allowed to point out the transgressions of a monk but a monk is allowed to point out the transgressions of a nun. Ānanda, this is the sixth rule of respect that I lay down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Ānanda, if a nun commits a serious offense ( _saṅghādisesa_ ), she is to undergo penance before both assemblies for fifteen days. Ānanda, this is the seventh rule of respect that I lay down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Ānanda, even if a nun has received full ordination for a hundred years she must still prostrate herself humbly before a recently ordained monk, be respectful and submissive, and greet him by extending her hands with palms together. Ānanda, this is the eighth rule of respect that I lay down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Ānanda, I lay down for women these eight rules of respect, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Ānanda, if Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī upholds these eight rules of respect, then this is her leaving home out of faith, going forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, obtaining full ordination, and becoming a nun. Thereupon Venerable Ānanda, having heard what the Buddha said, received it well, retained it well, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, cir- cumambulated him three times, and left. He went to Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī and told her:

Gotamī, women are allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline. Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, the World-honored One has laid down for women eight rules of respect, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. What are these eight?

Gotamī, a nun should seek full ordination from the bhikkhus. Gotamī, this is the first rule of respect that the World-honored One has laid down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Gotamī, a nun should seek instruction every half-month from the bhikkhus. Gotamī, this is the second rule of respect that the World-honored One has laid down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Gotamī, a nun is not allowed to spend the rains retreat in an area where there are no bhikkhus. Gotamī, this is the third rule of respect that the World honored One has laid down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Gotamī, when a nun has completed the rains retreat she should ask in both assemblies about three things: seeking about what has been seen, what has been heard, and what has been suspected. Gotamī, this is the fourth rule of respect that the World-honored One has laid down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Gotamī, if a monk has not given a nun permission to ask about the dis courses, the discipline, or the Abhidharma, then that nun is not allowed to ask him about them. [Only] if he has given her permission to ask about the discourses, the discipline, or the Abhidharma is she allowed to ask. Gotamī, this is the fifth rule of respect that the World-honored One has laid down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Gotamī, a nun is not allowed to point out the transgressions of a monk but a monk is allowed to point out the transgressions of a nun. Gotamī, this is the sixth rule of respect that the World-honored One has laid down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Gotamī, if a nun commits a serious offense, she is to undergo penance before both assemblies for fifteen days. Gotamī, this is the seventh rule of respect that the World-honored One has laid down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives.

Gotamī, even if a nun has had full ordination for a hundred years she must still prostrate herself humbly before a recently ordained monk, be respectful and submissive, and greet him, extending her hands with palms together. Gotamī, this is the eighth rule of respect that the World-honored One has laid down for women, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Gotamī, the World-honored One has laid down for women these eight rules of respect, which women may not transgress but must uphold until the end of their lives. Gotamī, the World-honored One has said this: “If Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī upholds these eight rules of respect, then this is her leaving home out of faith and going forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, obtaining full ordination, and becoming a nun.” At this Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī said: Venerable Ānanda, listen while I tell you a simile. The wise, on hearing a simile, understand its implication. Venerable Ānanda, it is just as [when] a warrior woman, a brahmin woman, a householder woman, or a worker woman, beautiful and attrac- tive, having cleansed and bathed herself and anointed her body with fra- grant oils, may put on bright clean clothes, and adorn herself with necklaces made of various kinds of precious stones. Suppose someone, feeling well- disposed toward this woman and wishing to benefit her and make her happy, then gives her a wreath of lotuses, a wreath of champak flowers, a wreath of great-flowered jasmine ( _sumanā_ ), a wreath of Arabian jasmine ( _vassikā_ ), or a wreath of roses. That woman would rejoice and accept it with both hands and adorn her head with it. In the same way, Venerable Ānanda, the World-honored One has laid down for women these eight rules of respect and I receive them on my head and will uphold them until the end of my life. Then Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī went forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, obtained full ordination, and became a nun.^352 At a later time, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī came to be followed and surrounded by a large assembly of nuns. Accompanied by various elder and highly

regarded nuns who were known to the king, and who had practiced the holy life for a long time, she approached Venerable Ānanda. Having paid homage to him and stood back to one side, she said: Venerable Ānanda should know that these are elder and highly regarded nuns, who are known to kings, and who have practiced the holy life for a long time. There are young bhikkhus, new in the training, who have only recently gone forth and entered this true Dharma and discipline, who have begun [this practice] not long ago. We wish that those bhikkhus should be ordered to pay homage to these nuns according to their seniority, that they should show respect and reverence and greet them by extending their hands with palms together. At this Venerable Ānanda said, “Gotamī, wait here. I will go to the Buddha and ask him about this.” Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī said, “Certainly, Venerable Ānanda.” Then Venerable Ānanda went to the Buddha, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet and stood back to one side. Extending his hands with palms together, he addressed the Buddha: World-honored One, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, accompanied by various elder and highly regarded nuns who are known to kings and who have practiced the holy life for a long time, came to me today. Having paid homage at my feet and stood to one side with palms together, she said to me, “Ven erable Ānanda, these elder and highly regarded nuns are known to kings and have practiced the holy life for a long time. There are young bhikkhus, new in the training, who have only recently gone forth and entered this true teaching and discipline, who have begun [this practice] not long ago. We wish that those bhikkhus should be ordered to pay homage to these nuns according to their seniority, that they should show respect and reverence and greet them by extending their hands with palms together.” The World-honored One said: Desist! Desist, Ānanda! Guard your words, do not speak like this! Ānanda, if you knew what I know, you would not say one word [about this], let alone speak like this.

Ānanda, if women had not been allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, then brahmins and householders would spread their clothes on the ground and say, “Diligent renunciants, walk on this! The diligent renunciants practice what is difficult to practice. Grant us long-lasting benefit and gain, peace and happiness [by stepping on these clothes]!” Ānanda, if women had not been allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, then brahmins and householders would spread their hair on the ground and say, “Diligent renunciants, walk on this! The diligent renunciants practice what is difficult to practice. Grant us long-lasting benefit and gain, peace and happiness [by stepping on this hair]!” Ānanda, if women had not been allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, then brahmins and householders, on seeing renunciants, would have been wait- ing by the wayside holding in their hands various types of food and drink, saying, “Venerable ones, accept this, eat this, take it with you and use it as you wish. Grant us long-lasting benefit and gain, peace and happiness!” Ānanda, if women had not been allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, then faithful brahmins, on seeing diligent renunciants, would respectfully take them by the arm, lead them into their houses, and hold up various sorts of material goods to give to the renunciants, saying, “Venerable Ones, accept this, take it with you and use it as you wish! Grant us long-lasting benefit and gain, peace and happiness!” Ānanda, if women had not been allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, then even the sun and moon, endowed as they are with great spiritual powers, great virtue, great merit, great spiritual might—even they would not equal the great spiritual might of a diligent renunciant, much less would those lifeless, skinny heterodox practitioners. Ānanda, if women had not been allowed to leave home out of faith and go forth to practice the path in this true Dharma and discipline, then this true Dharma would have lasted a thousand years. Now its duration has been decreased by five hundred years; it will last only five hundred years.

Ānanda, you should know that there are five positions a woman cannot achieve. It is not possible for a woman to be a tathāgata, without attachment and fully awakened;^353 a wheel-turning monarch; Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s; King Māra; or Great Brahmā. Know that a man can achieve these five states. It is possible that a man can be a tathāgata, without attachment and fully awakened; a wheel-turning monarch; Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s; King Māra; or Great Brahmā. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Ānanda and the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.

****

## The [First] Great

## Division


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma116-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[PLI-TV-BU-PM-PC30]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-AY1]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-AY2]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PC44]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PC45]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN143]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA116]]
> ◄  [[ma115-bdk]] 📜  [[ma117-bdk]] ►
