---
sutta_code: "MA123"
sutta_title:
  - "八城 "
  - "Aṭṭhakanāgara"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA123]]
> ◄  [[ma122-bdk]] 📜  [[ma124-bdk]] ►

### 123. The Discourse on the Renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa was also staying at Sāvatthī, in the Blind [Men’s] Forest.^385 He practiced diligently, not sleeping during the first and the last watches of the night, and was rightly established in the cultivation of the requisites of awakening. Then, while the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa was dwelling alone quietly, sitting in meditation and reflecting, this thought came to his mind: “Among the disciples of the World-honored One who diligently practice the true Dharma and discipline, I am foremost. Yet my mind has not attained liberation from the taints. My parents are very wealthy and prosperous; they have a great deal of wealth. Should I now abandon the precepts, cease prac ticing the path, and engage in sensual pleasures, while practicing generosity and doing meritorious deeds?” At that time the World-honored One, by means of knowledge of the minds of others, knew the thoughts in the mind of the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa. Then he told a certain monk, “Go and tell the renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa to come here.”^386 At this the monk answered, “Yes.” Then he rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. Approaching the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa, he said, “The World-honored One summons you.” The venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa, having heard the monk’s words, approached the Buddha, paid homage with his head [at the Buddha’s feet], stepped back, and sat to one side. The World-honored One said:

Renunciant, is it true that while you were dwelling alone quietly, sitting in meditation and reflecting, this thought came to your mind: “Among the disciples of the World-honored One who diligently practice the true Dharma and discipline, I am foremost. Yet my mind has not attained lib- eration from the taints. My parents are very wealthy and prosperous; they have a great deal of wealth. Should I now abandon the precepts, cease practicing the path, and engage in sensual pleasures, while practicing gen- erosity and doing meritorious deeds?” Then the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa felt ashamed and was not without trepidation [on realizing,] “The World-honored One knows what I was thinking!”^387 He extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha and said, “That is true.” The World-honored One said: Renunciant, I will now question you. Answer according to your under- standing. What do you think? When you were living at home, you were good at playing the lute harmoniously, with the lute in tune with the sound of singing and the singing in tune with the sound of the lute; is that so? The venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa said, “That is so, World-honored One.” The World-honored One asked further, “What do you think? If the strings of the lute are [too] tight, can it produce a pleasant, harmonious sound?” The renunciant answered, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One asked further, “What do you think? If the strings of the lute are [too] loose, can it produce a pleasant, harmonious sound?” The renunciant answered, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One asked again, “What do you think? If the strings of the lute are neither [too] tight nor [too] loose but just right, in between, can it produce a pleasant and harmonious sound?” The renunciant answered, “That is so, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said: In the same way, renunciant, too much effort makes the mind become restless; too little effort makes the mind indolent. Therefore, you should discriminate like this at the proper time. Observe these features! Do not be negligent!

At that time the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa heard what the Buddha said, received it well, and kept it well [in mind]. Then he rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. Having received the Buddha’s instruction with the simile of playing the lute, he dwelled alone in a secluded place and practiced diligently, without negligence of mind. Dwelling alone in a secluded place and practicing dili- gently, without negligence of mind, this son of a good family, who had shaved off his hair and beard, donned the yellow robes, left home out of faith, and become homeless to practice the path, realized in full the summit of the holy life. He dwelled having personally achieved understanding, awakening, and realization here and now. He knew as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” The venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa, having understood the Dharma, had become an arahant. At that time the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa, having become an arahant, thought, “Now is the right time. Should I approach the World-honored One and declare my attainment of final knowledge?” Then the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with his head [at the Buddha’s feet], he stepped back, sat to one side, and said:

World-honored One, if a monk has attained nonattachment and has com pletely destroyed the taints, [then for him] the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, the heavy burden has been cast away, the fetter of existence has been untied, and he has himself attained the good benefits with right knowledge and right liberation. At that time he delights in these six experiences: he delights in dispas sion, he delights in seclusion, he delights in nonconflict, he delights in the cessation of craving, he delights in the cessation of clinging, and he delights in imperturbability of the mind.^388 World-honored One, perhaps someone may think, “This venerable one delights in dispassion because he relies on faith,” [but] it should not be seen like this. It is just [due to] the cessation of desire, the cessation of hatred, and the cessation of ignorance that he delights in dispassion.

World-honored One, perhaps someone may think, “This venerable one delights in seclusion because he is greedy for material profit and fame, seeking offerings,’ [but] it should not be seen like this. It is just [due to] the cessation of desire, the cessation of hatred, and the cessation of igno- rance that he delights in seclusion. World-honored One, perhaps someone may think, “This venerable one delights in nonconflict because he relies on the precepts,’ [but] it should not be seen like this. It is just [due to] the cessation of desire, the cessation of hatred, and the cessation of ignorance that he delights in nonconflict, delights in the cessation of craving, delights in the cessation of clinging, and delights in imperturbability of the mind. World-honored One, if a monk has attained nonattachment and exhausted the taints, [for him] the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, the heavy burden has been cast away, the fetter of existence has been untied, and he has personally attained the good benefits with right comprehension and right liberation, then at that time he delights in these six experiences. World-honored One, if a monk in training, seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana, has not yet attained his intention, at that time he has accomplished the faculties of one in training and the moral habits of one in training. At a later time he exhausts all taints and attains the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom. He dwells having per- sonally achieved understanding, awakening, and realization here and now, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been estab- lished, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another expe- rience of existence.” At that time he has accomplished the faculties of one beyond training and the moral habits of one beyond training. World-honored One, it is just as a young boy who at that time [in his life] has accomplished minor faculties and minor moral habits. At a later time he becomes equipped with the faculties of one in training. At that time he has accomplished the faculties of one in training and the moral habits of one in training.^389 In the same way, World-honored One, if a monk in training, seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana, has not yet attained his intention, then at that time he has accomplished the faculties of one in training and the

moral habits of one in training. At a later time he exhausts all taints and attains the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom. He dwells having personally achieved understanding, awakening, and real ization here and now, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experience of existence.” At that time he has accom plished the faculties of one beyond training and the moral habits of one beyond training. If his eyes encounter forms perceivable by the eyes, then these will not be able to make him lose this liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom; his mind remains established within, well controlled and guarded, and he observes the rise and fall of phenomena. If... sounds perceivable by the ears... odors perceivable by the nose... flavors perceivable by the tongue... tangibles perceivable by the body... mental objects per ceivable by the mind, then these will not be able to make him lose this liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom; his mind remains estab lished within, well controlled and guarded, and he observes the rise and fall of phenomena. World-honored One, it is just as if not far from a village there is a great rocky mountain without clefts, without chasms, not easily broken, solidly fixed, without cavities, a single mass. If a strong wind and rain come from the east they cannot shake or agitate [the mountain], nor can the east wind move [the mountain aside] to the south. If a strong wind and rain come from the south they cannot shake or agitate [the mountain], nor can the south wind move [the mountain aside] to the west. If a strong wind and rain come from the west they cannot shake and agitate [the mountain], nor can the west wind move [the mountain aside] to the north. If a strong wind and rain come from the north they cannot shake and agitate [the moun tain], nor can the north wind move [the mountain aside] in any direction. In the same way, if his eyes encounter forms perceivable by the eyes, these will not be able to make him lose this liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom; his mind stays established within, well controlled and guarded, and he observes the rise and fall of phenomena. If [his senses encounter] sounds perceivable by the ears... odors perceivable by the nose... flavors perceivable by the tongue... tangibles perceivable by

the body... mental objects perceivable by the mind, these will not be able to make him lose this liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom; his mind stays established within, well controlled and guarded, and he observes the rise and fall of phenomena. Then the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa uttered these verses: One who delights in dispassion Whose mind dwells in seclusion Delights in being without conflict And rejoices in the cessation of clinging. One who also delights in the cessation of clinging And in the imperturbability of the mind On attaining true knowledge, Through this his mind is liberated. On attaining liberation of the mind, A monk’s faculties are calmed. That accomplished, he need look no further; There is no further seeking to be done. Just as a rocky mountain Is not agitated by the wind, So too forms, sounds, odors, flavors And tangibles, Things lovable and unlovable, Cannot agitate the mind.^390 The venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa, having proclaimed before the Buddha his attainment of final knowledge, rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. At that time, soon after the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa had left, the World-honored One told the bhikkhus:

Sons of a good family should proclaim before me their attainment of final knowledge, just as the venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa proclaimed before me his attainment of final knowledge. Without praising himself or

looking down on others, he told of the benefits here and now, according to his experience. Let no ignorant ones, entangled in excessive conceit, come before me and proclaim attainment of final knowledge! They have obtained no ben efits but instead big trouble. The venerable renunciant Soṇa Kolivīsa proclaimed before me his attain ment of final knowledge without praising himself or looking down on others. He told of the benefits here and now, according to his experience. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma123-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA23.3]], [[SA254]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.117]], [[AN10.118]], [[AN10.169]], [[AN10.170]], [[SN45.34]], [[SN46.17]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA123]]
> ◄  [[ma122-bdk]] 📜  [[ma124-bdk]] ►
