---
sutta_code: "MA136"
sutta_title:
  - "商人求財 "
  - "Merchants Who Searched for Property"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA136]]
> ◄  [[ma135-bdk]] 📜  [[ma137-bdk]] ►

### 136. The Discourse on Merchants Who Searched for Property

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One addressed the bhikkhus: Long ago, in [the continent of] Jambudīpa a group of merchants assembled in a merchants’ assembly hall. They thought, “Let us board an oceangoing ship and sail across the ocean in order to bring back treasure to meet our housekeeping expenses.” They thought again, “Friends, since we cannot foresee whether or not it will be safe to sail across the sea, let us each pre- pare flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts.” Then, after they had each prepared flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts, they set out to sea. As they were sailing across the sea, their ship was destroyed by the king of the _makara_ sea monsters. The merchants drifted in various different directions on their flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts. At that time there suddenly arose a strong wind from the east which blew the merchants to the western shore of the sea. There they met many

women of very dignified beauty, all of whom had their bodies adorned with various kinds of jewelry. On seeing the merchants, those women said: “Welcome, friends! Come quickly, friends! This is an extremely pleasant and most wonderful place with parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves. There is much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, maṇi- jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, car nelian, coral, amber, agate, tortoiseshell, ruby, and jade-pearl. All of this, friends, we will give to you. You should enjoy yourselves together with us. [But,] merchants of Jambudīpa, do not go toward the south, even in your dreams!” The merchants all enjoyed themselves together with the women. The merchants cohabited with the women who consequently gave birth to male or female [offspring]. Later, one wise merchant of Jambudīpa, while alone in a quiet place, thought, “Why do the women prohibit us from going toward the south? Let me keep watch on the woman with whom I am living. When I know that she has fallen asleep, I will slowly and quietly get up and secretly go toward the south.” That one wise merchant of Jambudīpa therefore kept watch on the woman with whom he was living; knowing that she had fallen asleep, he slowly and quietly got up and secretly went toward the south.^81 As he went south, that one wise merchant of Jambudīpa heard in the distance a great uproar, with high-pitched voices calling out. The noise came from many people weeping regretfully, calling out for their parents, crying out for their wives and their beloved and intimate friends, and lamenting that they were unable to see again the excellent Jambudīpa, which had been so peaceful and happy. On hearing that, the merchant was in great fear and all his body hairs stood on end. [He thought,] “Let not anyone, human or non-human, entrap me!” Then the one wise merchant of Jambudīpa overcame his fear and continued heading southward. Having gone further southward, the one wise merchant of Jambudīpa suddenly saw in the east a great iron wall. On seeing that, he looked all over it but could see no door, nor even a place where a cat could get out. To the north of the iron wall the one wise merchant of Jambudīpa saw a big thicket of trees. Going to that big thicket, he slowly and quietly

climbed [one of the trees]. Having climbed it, he asked that great group of people, “Friends, why are you weeping regretfully, calling out for your parents, crying out for your wives^82 and your beloved and intimate friends, and lamenting that you are unable to see again the excellent Jambudīpa, which was so peaceful and happy?” Then that great group of people answered, “Friend, we are merchants of Jambudīpa. [Once] we assembled in the merchants’ assembly hall, and we thought, ‘Let us board an oceangoing ship and sail across the ocean in order to bring back treasure to meet our housekeeping expenses.’ We thought again, ‘Friends, since we cannot foresee whether or not it will be safe to sail across the sea, let us each prepare flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts.’ “Friend, after we had each prepared flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts, we set out to sea. Friend, as we were sailing across the sea, our ship was destroyed by the king of the _makara_ sea mon- sters. Friend, we all drifted in various different directions on our flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts. “At that time there suddenly arose a strong wind from the east, which blew us merchants to the western shore of the sea. There we met many women of very dignified beauty, all of whom had their bodies adorned with various kinds of jewelry. On seeing us, those women said, ‘Welcome, friends! Come quickly, friends! This is an extremely pleasant and wonderful place with parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves. There is much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, _maṇi-_ jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch-shell, coral, amber, agate, tor- toiseshell, ruby, and jade-pearl. All of this, friends, we will give to you. You should enjoy yourselves together with us. [But,] merchants of Jam- budīpa, do not go toward the south, even in your dreams!’ “Friend, we all enjoyed ourselves together with the women. We cohabited with the women who consequently gave birth to male or female [offspring]. Friend, as long as those women did not hear of other merchants of Jam- budīpa sailing on the sea and of their ship being destroyed by the king of the _makara_ sea monsters, they enjoyed themselves together with us. “[But,] friend, when the women heard of other merchants of Jambudīpa sailing on the sea and of their ship being destroyed by the king of the

makara sea monsters, they [began] feeding on us. We have suffered greatly. When those women are eating a person, if there are any remaining hairs, nails, or teeth, they take them and eat them up completely. When those women are eating a person, if any blood has dripped on to the ground, they dig down four inches with their nails to get it and eat it. “Friend, you should know that we merchants of Jambudīpa were orig inally five hundred people. Of those, two hundred and fifty people have already been eaten. The remaining two hundred and fifty are all now within this great iron wall. Friend, do not trust what those women say! They are not real people. They are yakkha demons.” At this the one wise merchant of Jambudīpa descended slowly and quietly from the big thicket of trees and went back the way he had come. He returned to the place where he was living together with the woman. Finding that the woman was still asleep and had not yet woken up, the one wise merchant of Jambudīpa went immediately, that very night, to the other merchants of Jambudīpa. He said [to them], “You should all come together to a quiet place. Each one come alone; do not bring your children. [We] should secretly discuss something there together.” The merchants of Jambudīpa went together to that quiet place, each of them going alone, not bringing his children. Then the one wise merchant of Jambudīpa said, “Merchants, while I was alone in this quiet place, I had this thought, ‘Why do the women pro hibit us from going toward the south? Let me keep watch on the woman with whom I am living. When I know that she has fallen asleep, I will slowly and quietly get up and secretly go to the south.’ “Then I kept watch on the woman with whom I was living; and knowing that she had fallen asleep, I slowly and quietly got up and secretly went toward the south. As I went south, I heard in the distance a great uproar, with high-pitched voices calling out. The noise came from many people weeping regretfully, calling out for their parents, crying out for their wives and their beloved and intimate friends, and lamenting that they were unable to see again the excellent Jambudīpa, which had been so peaceful and happy. “On hearing that, I was in great fear, and all my body hairs stood on end. [I thought,] ‘Let not anyone, human or nonhuman, entrap me!’ Then I overcame my fear and continued heading southward. Having gone further

southward, I suddenly saw in the east a great iron wall. Seeing that, I looked all over it, but could see no door, nor even a place where a cat could get out. “To the north of the iron wall I also saw a big thicket of trees. Going to that big thicket, I slowly and quietly climbed [one of the trees]. Having climbed it, I asked that great group of people, ‘Friends, why are you weeping regretfully, calling out for your parents, crying out for your wives and your beloved and intimate friends, and lamenting that you are unable to see again the excellent Jambudīpa, which was so peaceful and happy?’ “Then that great group of people said in reply to me, ‘Friend, we are merchants of Jambudīpa. [Once] we assembled in a merchants’ assembly hall and we thought, “Let us board an oceangoing ship and sail across the ocean in order to bring back treasures to meet our housekeeping expenses.” Friend, we thought again, “Friends, since we cannot foresee whether or not it will be safe to sail across the sea, let us each prepare flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts.” ‘Friend, after we had each prepared flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts, we set out to sea. Friend, as we were sailing across the sea, our ship was destroyed by the king of the _makara_ sea mon- sters. Friend, we all drifted in various different directions on our flotation devices, such as sheepskin bags, big gourds, and rafts. ‘At that time there suddenly arose a strong wind from the east, which blew us merchants to the western shore of the sea. There we met many women of very dignified beauty, all of whom had their bodies adorned with various kinds of jewelry. On seeing us, those women said, “Welcome, friends! Come quickly, friends! This is an extremely pleasant and wonderful place with parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves. There is much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, _maṇi-_ jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch-shell, coral, amber, agate, tor- toiseshell, ruby, and jade-pearl. All of this, friends, we will give to you. You should enjoy yourselves together with us. [But,] merchants of Jam- budīpa, do not go toward the south, even in your dreams!” ‘Friend, we all enjoyed ourselves together with the women. We cohab- ited with the women who consequently gave birth to male or female [off- spring]. Friend, as long as those women did not hear of other merchants

of Jambudīpa sailing on the sea and of their ship being destroyed by the king of the makara sea monsters, they enjoyed themselves together with us. ‘[But,] friend, when the women heard of other merchants of Jambudīpa sailing on the sea and of their ship being destroyed by the king of the makara sea monsters, they [began] feeding on us. We have suffered greatly. When those women are eating a person, if there are any remaining hairs, nails, or teeth, they take them and eat them up completely. When those women are eating a person, if any blood has dripped on to the ground, they dig down four inches with their nails to get it and eat it. ‘Friend, you should know that we merchants of Jambudīpa were orig inally five hundred people. Of those, two hundred and fifty people have been eaten up already. The remaining two hundred and fifty are all now within this great iron wall. Friend, do not trust what those women say! They are not real people. They are yakkha demons.’” Then the merchants of Jambudīpa asked the one wise merchant of Jam budīpa, “Friend, did you ask that great group of people, ‘Friends, is there any means whereby we people and you people can safely cross over from here to Jambudīpa?’” The one wise merchant of Jambudīpa answered, “Friends, at that time I left without asking that.” Then the merchants of Jambudīpa told him, “Friend, go back to the place of the woman with whom you are living. Keep watch on her, and when she has fallen asleep, get up slowly and quietly, and secretly go to the south. Go back to those people and ask them, ‘Friends, is there any means whereby we people and you people can safely cross over from here to Jambudīpa?’” Then the one wise mer chant of Jambudīpa accepted the [request of the other] merchants by remaining silent. Then the one wise merchant of Jambudīpa returned to the place of the woman with whom he was living. Keeping watch on her until she had fallen asleep, he got up slowly and quietly and secretly went toward the south. He went again to where the great group of people was and asked them, “Friends, is there any means whereby we people and you people can safely cross over from here to Jambudīpa?” The people in that great group answered, “Friend, there is no further means whereby we people can safely cross over from here to Jambudīpa.

Friend, we [once] thought, ‘We should together break this wall down and return home.’ But just as we had this thought, the wall became twice its normal height. Friend, this so-called means has actually prevented us from safely crossing over from here to Jambudīpa. “Friend, [you asked whether] there are any other means whereby you people can safely cross over from here to Jambudīpa. For us people there will never be any means. “[However,] friend, we have heard _deva_ s up in space proclaiming, ‘You merchants of Jambudīpa are ignorant, indecisive, and also of poor understanding. Why is that? On the fifteenth day [of the month], when the code of rules is recited, you are not permitted to go toward the south. That is the day when the king of horses (Valahassa) eats naturally growing rice, calmly and happily, with all his faculties complete. [Having eaten,] he calls out three times, “Who wants to cross to the other shore? Who wants me to liberate him? Who wants me to take him safely across from here to Jambudīpa?” “Go, all of you, to the king of horses and say, ‘We want to get across to the other shore. May you liberate us! May you take us safely across from here to Jambudīpa!’ Friend, this is the means by which you people can cross safely from here to Jambudīpa. Merchant, you come, approach the king of horses and say, ‘We want to cross to the other shore. May you liberate us! May you take us safely across from here to Jambudīpa!’” Then, [after returning from the south to his companions,] the one wise merchant of Jambudīpa announced, “Merchants, it is now time to approach the king of horses and say, ‘We want to cross to the other shore. May you liberate us! May you take us safely across from here to Jambudīpa!’ “Merchants, [let us] follow the advice of the _deva_ s! Merchants, on the fifteenth day [of the month], when the code of rules is recited, the king of horses eats naturally growing rice, calmly and happily, with all his fac- ulties complete. [Having eaten,] he will call out three times, ‘Who wants to get across to the other shore? Who wants me to liberate them? Who wants me to take them safely across from here to Jambudīpa?’ At that time we will immediately approach him and say, ‘We want to cross to the other shore. May you liberate us! May you take us safely across from here to Jambudīpa!’”

Then on the fifteenth day, when the code of rules was recited, the king of horses ate naturally growing rice, calmly and happily, with all his fac ulties complete. [Having eaten], he called out three times, “Who wants to cross over to the other shore? I will liberate him. I will take him safely across from here to Jambudīpa.” Then, hearing that, the merchants of Jambudīpa immediately approached the king of horses and said, “We want to cross over to the other shore. May you liberate us! May you take us across safely from here to Jambudīpa!”^83 Then the king of horses said, “Merchants, those women will certainly come, holding their children in their arms, and say, ‘Friends, welcome! Come back! This is an extremely pleasant and wonderful place with parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves. There is much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, maṇi- jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch-shell, coral, amber, agate, tortoiseshell, ruby, and jade-pearl. All of this, friends, we have given to you. You should enjoy yourselves together with us. If you do not need us anymore, then you should [at least] feel pity for the children.’ “If any of you merchants thinks, ‘I own [this] male or female [child]. I own [this] extremely pleasant and wonderful place with its parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves. I possess much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, maṇi- jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch-shell, coral, amber, agate, tortoiseshell, ruby, and jade-pearl,’ then, even though he is riding right on my back, he will certainly topple over and fall into the water. Then he will be eaten by the women and meet with misfortune. When those women are eating a person, if there are any remaining hairs, nails, or teeth, they take them and eat them up completely. When those women are eating a person, if any blood has dripped on to the ground, they dig down four inches with their nails to get it and eat it. “If [however,] any of you merchants does not think, ‘I own [this] male or female [child]. I own [this] extremely pleasant and wonderful place with its parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves. I possess much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, maṇi jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch-shell, coral, amber, agate, tor toiseshell, ruby, and jade-pearl,’ then, even if he is holding on to just one hair of my body, he will certainly get safely across to Jambudīpa.”

Then the World-honored One told the bhikkhus:

Those women came holding their children in their arms, saying, “Friends, welcome! Come back! This is an extremely pleasant and wonderful place with its parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves. There is much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, _maṇi-_ jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch-shell, coral, amber, agate, tor- toiseshell, ruby, and jade-pearl. All of this we have given to you, friends. You should enjoy it together with us.” If [any of] those merchants thought, “I own [this] male or female [child]; I own this extremely pleasant and wonderful place with its parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves; I possess much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, _maṇi-_ jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch-shell, coral, amber, agate, tortoiseshell, ruby, and jade- pearl,” then, even if he were riding right on the back of the king of horses, he certainly toppled over and fell into the water. Then he was eaten by the women and met with misfortune. When those women are eating a per- son, if there are any remaining hairs, nails, or teeth, they take them and eat them up completely. When those women are eating a person, if any blood has dripped on to the ground, they dig down four inches with their nails to get it and eat it. If [however, any of] those merchants did not think, “I own [this] male or female [child]; I own this extremely pleasant and wonderful place with its parks, viewing terraces, bathing pools, seats and couches, and luxuriant groves; I possess much wealth: gold, silver, crystal, beryl, _maṇi-_ jewel, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch-shell, coral, amber, agate, tortoiseshell, ruby, and jade-pearl,” then, even if he were holding onto just one hair of the king of horses, he certainly crossed over safely to Jambudīpa. bhikkhus, I have delivered these similes wanting you to understand their meaning. This has been said with this meaning. My Dharma is well expounded, widely revealing, well protected, and without defect. It is like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device. It is widely spread out everywhere, reaching _deva_ s and human beings. It is in this way that my Dharma is well expounded, very widely revealing, well protected, and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching _deva_ s and human beings.

If a monk thinks, “The eye is mine; I own the eye... the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... the mind is mine; I own the mind,” then that monk will certainly come to harm, just like the merchants that were eaten by yakkha s.^84 My Dharma is well expounded, very widely revealing, well protected, and without defect. It is like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching deva s and human beings. It is in this way that my Dharma is well expounded, very widely reveal ing, well protected and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching deva s and human beings. If [however,] a monk thinks, “The eye is not mine; I do not possess the eye... the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... the mind is not mine; I do not possess the mind,” then that monk will be able to leave safely, just like the merchants riding on the king of horses who crossed over safely. My Dharma is well expounded, very widely revealing, well protected, and without defect. It is like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching deva s and human beings. It is in this way that my Dharma is well expounded, very widely reveal ing, well protected, and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching deva s and human beings. If a monk thinks, “Forms are mine; I possess forms... sounds... odors... flavors... tangibles... mental objects are mine; I possess mental objects,” then that monk will certainly come to harm, just like the merchants that were eaten by yakkha s. My Dharma is well expounded, very widely revealing, well protected and without defect. It is like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching deva s and human beings. It is in this way that my Dharma is well expounded, very widely reveal ing, well protected and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching deva s and human beings. If [however,] a monk thinks, “Forms are not mine; I do not possess forms... sounds... odors... flavors... tangibles... mental objects are not mine; I do not possess mental objects,” then that monk will be

able to leave safely, just like the merchants riding on the king of horses who crossed over safely. My Dharma is well expounded, very widely revealing, well protected and without defect. It is like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device. It is widely spread out everywhere, reaching _deva_ s and human beings. It is in this way that my Dharma is well expounded, very widely reveal- ing, well protected and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching _deva_ s and human beings. If a monk thinks, “The aggregate of form is mine; I possess the aggregate of form... the aggregate of feeling... the aggregate of perception... the aggregate of volitional formations... the aggregate of consciousness is mine; I possess the aggregate of consciousness,” then that monk will certainly come to harm, just like the merchants that were eaten by _yakkha_ s. My Dharma is well expounded, very widely revealing, well protected, and without defect. It is like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching _deva_ s and human beings. It is in this way that my Dharma is well expounded, very widely reveal- ing, well protected, and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching _deva_ s and human beings. If [however,] a monk thinks, “The aggregate of form is not mine; I do not possess the aggregate of form... the aggregate of feeling... the aggregate of perception... the aggregate of volitional formations... the aggregate of consciousness is not mine; I do not possess the aggregate of consciousness,” then that monk will be able to leave safely, just like the merchants riding on the king of horses who crossed over safely. My Dharma is well expounded, very widely revealing, well protected and without defect. It is like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching _deva_ s and human beings. It is in this way that my Dharma is well expounded, very widely reveal- ing, well protected, and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching _deva_ s and human beings. If a monk thinks, “Earth is mine; I possess earth... water... fire... wind... space... consciousness is mine; I possess consciousness,” then that monk will certainly come to harm, just like the merchants that were eaten by _yakkha_ s.

My Dharma is well expounded, very widely revealing, well protected and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching deva s and human beings. It is in this way that my Dharma is well expounded, very widely reveal ing, well protected, and without defect, like a bridge, a raft, or a flotation device, widely spread out everywhere, reaching deva s and human beings. If, [however,] a monk thinks, “Earth is not mine; I do not possess earth... water... fire... wind... space... consciousness is not mine; I do not possess consciousness,” then that monk will be able to leave safely, just like the merchants riding on the king of horses who crossed over safely. Then the World-honored One uttered these verses: If a person lacks faith In the true Dharma and discipline taught by the Buddha, Then that person will certainly come to harm, Like being eaten by yakkha s. If [however,] a person has faith In the true Dharma and discipline taught by the Buddha, Then that person will be able to cross over safely, Like riding on the king of horses. Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma136-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA136]]
> ◄  [[ma135-bdk]] 📜  [[ma137-bdk]] ►
