---
sutta_code: "MA132"
sutta_title:
  - "賴吒何惒羅 "
  - "To Raṭṭhapāla"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA132]]
> ◄  [[ma130-bdk]] 📜  [[ma133-bdk]] ►

### 132. The Discourse on Raṭṭhapāla

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was traveling among the Kurus together with a large company of bhikkhus. Having reached Thullakoṭṭhita, he stayed in a rosewood grove north of Thullakoṭṭhita village. At that time the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita heard this: The renunciant Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who left the Sakyan clan and went forth to train in the path, has been traveling among the Kurus together with a large company of bhikkhus and, having reached Thullakoṭṭhita, is staying in a rosewood grove north of Thullakoṭṭhita village. That renun- ciant Gotama has great fame, being well known in the ten directions. The renunciant Gotama is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one. In this world with its _deva_ s, _māra_ s, Brahmās, renunciants, and brahmins, from human beings to _deva_ s, he dwells having personally achieved under- standing, awakening, and realization. He teaches the Dharma, which is sublime in the beginning, sublime in the middle, and sublime in the end, with its meaning and phrasing, endowed with purity, and he reveals the holy life. If [one] visits the Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awak- ened, reveres, pays respect, and offers support and honor to [him], then one quickly obtains good benefits. We should go together to visit the renun- ciant Gotama, to pay our respects and offer our support to [him]. On hearing that, the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita, each accom- panied by the members of his family group, went out of Thullakoṭṭhita and

headed north to a rosewood grove, wishing to visit the World-honored One, to pay their respects and offer their support to him. Having approached the Buddha, some of the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side; some exchanged greetings with the Buddha, then stepped back and sat to one side; some extended their hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, then stepped back and sat to one side; and some, having seen the Buddha from afar, sat down silently. At that time, when all of the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita were seated, the Buddha taught them the Dharma, exhorted and encouraged them, accomplishing their delight. Having taught them the Dharma with countless skillful means, having exhorted and inspired them, fully delighting them, he remained silent. Then, after the Buddha had taught them the Dharma, exhorted and inspired them, fully delighting them, the brahmin householders of Thul lakoṭṭhita rose from their seats, paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated the Buddha three times, and left. At that time there was present a young householder named Raṭṭhapāla, who intentionally remained seated without rising. Then, soon after the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita had left, the young householder Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, arranged his clothes so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said: World-honored One, as I understand the Dharma taught by the Buddha, if I live the home life, then I am chained with chains, unable to practice the holy life in purity for my whole life. World-honored One, may I receive from the World-honored One the going forth to train in the path, receive the full ordination and become a monk, to practice the holy life in purity! The World-honored One asked: Young householder, have your parents allowed you to give up the house hold life out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline and become a homeless one to train in the path? The young householder Raṭṭhapāla said: World-honored One, my parents have not yet allowed me to give up the

household life out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline and become a homeless one to train in the path. The World-honored One told him: Young householder, if your parents have not allowed you to give up the household life out of faith and become a homeless one to practice the path in the true Dharma and discipline, then I cannot let you go forth to train in the path, and also cannot give you the full ordination. The young householder Raṭṭhapāla said: World-honored One, I shall make effort in requesting this of my parents and will certainly get them to allow me to give up the household life and, out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline, become a homeless one to train in the path. The World-honored One told him, “Young householder, do as you wish.” Thereupon the young householder Raṭṭhapāla, having heard what the Buddha said, having received it well and kept it [in mind], paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and returned home. He said [to his parents]: Honored [parents], as I understand the Dharma taught by the Buddha, if I live the household life then I am chained with chains, unable to practice the holy life in purity for my whole life. May my honored [parents] allow me to give up the household life and, out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline, become a homeless one to train in the path! Raṭṭhapāla’s parents said: Raṭṭhapāla, you are now our only son, whom we very much love and for whom we have tender regard; our minds always delight in you and we never get enough of seeing [you]. Even if you died, we would still not want to give you up, let alone be separated from you while you are alive and not see you [any longer]. Three times the young householder Raṭṭhapāla said:

Honored [parents], as I understand the Dharma taught by the Buddha, if I live the household life, then I am chained with chains, unable to practice the holy life in purity for my whole life. May my honored [parents] allow me to give up the household life and, out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline, become a homeless one to train in the path! And three times the parents of the young householder Raṭṭhapāla’s said: Raṭṭhapāla, you are now our only son, whom we very much love and for whom we have tender regard; our minds always delight in you and we never get enough of seeing [you]. Even if you died, we would still not want to give you up, let alone be separated from you while you are alive and not see you [any longer]. Then the young householder Raṭṭhapāla right away lay down on the ground [and said]:

From now on I will not get up, neither drink nor eat, until my parents allow me to give up the household life out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline and become a homeless one to train in the path. Then the young householder Raṭṭhapāla took no food for one day; for two, three, four, several days he took no food. At this the parents of the young householder Raṭṭhapāla went to their son and said:

Raṭṭhapāla, you are very delicate, with a very fine body, and always [accus- tomed to] sitting or lying on fine beds. Are you not feeling pain now? Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Quickly! Engage in sensual pleasures and in generous giving! Joyfully practice meritorious deeds! Why is that? Raṭṭhapāla, [liv- ing] conditions with the World-honored One are very difficult, very dif- ficult. Going forth to train in the path is also very difficult. At that time the young householder Raṭṭhapāla remained silent and did not reply.^2 At this the parents of the young householder Raṭṭhapāla went to his intimate friends and attendants and said, “All of you together, come to Raṭṭhapāla and persuade him to get up off the ground!”

The young householder Raṭṭhapāla’s intimate friends and attendants went together to Raṭṭhapāla and said:

Raṭṭhapāla, you are very delicate, with a very fine body, and always [accus- tomed to] sitting or lying on fine beds. Are you not feeling pain now? Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Quickly! Engage in sensual pleasures and in generous giving! Joyfully practice meritorious deeds! Why is that? Raṭṭhapāla, [liv- ing] conditions with the World-honored One are very difficult, very dif- ficult. Going forth to train in the path is also very difficult. At that time the young householder Raṭṭhapāla remained silent and did not reply. Then the parents of the young householder Raṭṭhapāla went to his good friends, companions, and contemporaries and said this, “All of you together, come as a group to Raṭṭhapāla and persuade him to get up off the ground!”^3 Then the young householder Raṭṭhapāla’s good friends, companions, and contemporaries went together to Raṭṭhapāla and said:

Raṭṭhapāla, you are very delicate, with a very fine body, and always [accus- tomed to] sitting or lying on fine beds. Are you not feeling pain now? Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Quickly! Engage in sensual pleasures and in generous giving! Joyfully practice meritorious deeds! Why is that? Raṭṭhapāla, [liv- ing] conditions with the World-honored One are very difficult, very dif- ficult. Going forth to train in the path is also very difficult. At that time the young householder Raṭṭhapāla remained silent and did not reply. At this the young householder Raṭṭhapāla’s good friends, companions, and contemporaries went to the young householder Raṭṭhapāla’s parents and said:

Allow Raṭṭhapāla to give up the household life out of faith, and to become a homeless one to practice the path in the true Dharma and discipline! If he delights in it, you can still meet each other in this life; if he does not delight in it, he will certainly return of his own accord to his parents. If you do not allow [him] now, he will certainly die, without doubt. Of what benefit is that?

On hearing this, the parents of the young householder Raṭṭhapāla told the good friends, companions, and contemporaries of the young householder Raṭṭhapāla:

We now allow Raṭṭhapāla to give up the household life out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline and become a homeless one to train in the path. When he has trained in the path, he must come back and visit [us]. Then the good friends, companions, and contemporaries of the young householder Raṭṭhapāla went together to Raṭṭhapāla and said:

Young householder, your parents allow you to give up the household life out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline and become a homeless one to practice the path. When you have finished training in the path, return to visit your parents. On hearing this, the young householder Raṭṭhapāla was very joyful; delight and happiness arose in him. He got up off the ground and gradually nourished his body. After his body had recovered, he went out of Thullakoṭṭhita and went to where the Buddha was. He paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet and said:

World-honored One, my parents have allowed me to give up the household life out of faith in the true Dharma and discipline and become a homeless one to train in the path. World-honored One, may I receive from the World- honored One the going forth to train in the path, receive the full ordination, and become a monk! Then the World-honored One let the young householder Raṭṭhapāla go forth to train in the path by giving him the full ordination. Having given him the full ordination, [the Buddha,] after staying on for some time in Thul- lakoṭṭhita, took his robes and bowl and went wandering. Traveling by stages, he reached Sāvatthī and stayed in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla, having gone forth to train in the path and having received the full ordination, lived alone in a secluded place, practicing dili- gently and with a mind that is without negligence. Having lived alone in a secluded place, practicing diligently and with a mind that is without negligence, [this] son of good family who had shaved

off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and gone forth to practice the path, attained fully the summit of the holy life. He dwelled having personally achieved understanding, awakening, and realization here and now. He knew as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done. There will not be another experiencing of existence.” The venerable Raṭṭhapāla, having under- stood the Dharma... up to... had become an arahant. Then, after having been an arahant for nine or ten years,^4 the venerable Raṭṭhapāla thought, “Long ago I promised that, after going forth and training in the path, I would return to visit my parents. Let me now return to keep that promise of long ago.” Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side, he said:

World-honored One, long ago I promised that after having gone forth and trained in the path, I would return to see my parents. World-honored One, I now ask leave to go and visit my parents and keep my promise of long ago. At that time the World-honored One thought, “It is definitely not possible that the clansman Raṭṭhapāla might abandon the precepts, cease practicing the path, or indulge in sensual pleasures as before.” Knowing this, the World- honored One told him:

Go and rescue those who have not yet been rescued, liberate those who have not yet been liberated, [lead to] complete extinction those who have not yet attained complete extinction!^5 Raṭṭhapāla, now do as you wish. Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla, having heard what the Buddha said, received it well and kept it well [in mind]. He rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. Going to his quarters, he stowed away his bedding, put on his robes, took his bowl, and went wandering. Traveling in stages, he approached Thul- lakoṭṭhita and stayed in a rosewood grove north of Thullakoṭṭhita village. Then, when the night was over, at dawn, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Thullakoṭṭhita to beg for almsfood. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla thought, “The World-honored One praises begging for almsfood in [uninterrupted] sequence. Let me now beg for almsfood in

Thullakoṭṭhita in [uninterrupted] sequence.” Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla begged for almsfood in Thullakoṭṭhita in [uninterrupted] sequence, and in turn reached his former home. At that time the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father was standing at the central gate, dressing his hair and beard. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father, seeing the venerable Raṭṭhapāla coming in the distance, said: These bald-pated renunciants are bound by [their own] darkness. They have severed their lineage since they are without sons. They broke up our family. We had only one son, whom we loved very much and for whom we had tender regard. Our minds always delighted in him and we never got enough of seeing him. [But] he was taken away by [one of you]. I will not give you food. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla received no alms at his own father’s house; he got only abuse: These bald-pated renunciants are bound by [their own] darkness. They have severed their lineage since they are without sons. They broke up our family. We had only one son, whom we loved very much and for whom we had tender regard. Our minds always delighted in him and we never got enough of seeing him. [But] he was taken away by [one of you]. I will not give you food. Having understood that, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla quickly went away. At that time a maidservant in the household of the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father was about to discard a basketful of smelly stale food and drink on a garbage heap. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla, seeing that his father’s maidservant was about to discard a basketful of smelly stale food and drink on a garbage heap, said, “Sister, if this stale food and drink is of a nature to be discarded, then put it into my bowl! I will eat it.” Then the maidservant in the household of the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father poured the smelly stale food and drink from the basket into the bowl. While pouring it into the bowl, she recognized [Raṭṭhapāla] by noticing two of his physical features, namely his voice and his hands and feet. Having noticed these two features, she went to the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father and said,^6

“Master, now you should know that your son, Master Raṭṭhapāla, has returned here to Thullakoṭṭhita. Go and see him!” On hearing that, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father leapt up with great joy. Gathering up his garments with his left hand and smoothing down his hair and beard with his right hand, he hurried to the venerable Raṭṭhapāla. At that time the venerable Raṭṭhapāla was [sitting] facing a wall and eating the smelly stale food. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father, seeing the venerable Raṭṭhapāla [sitting] facing a wall and eating the smelly stale food, said:

Raṭṭhapāla, you are very delicate, with a very fine body, and you have always had fine food. Raṭṭhapāla, why are you eating this smelly stale food? Raṭṭhapāla, having come here to Thullakoṭṭhita, why can you not return to your parents’ home? The venerable Raṭṭhapāla replied: Householder, I went to my father’s home, but got no alms. I got [only] abuse: “These bald-pated renunciants are bound by [their own] darkness. They have severed their lineage since they are without sons. They broke up our family. We had only one son, whom we loved very much and for whom we had tender regard. Our minds always delighted in him and we never got enough of seeing him. [But] he was taken away by [one of you]. I will not give you food.” On hearing this, I quickly went away. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father immediately apologized, saying: Bear with me, Raṭṭhapāla! Bear with me, Raṭṭhapāla! I truly did not know that it was you, Raṭṭhapāla, who had returned and come to his father’s home.^7 Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father respectfully took Raṭṭhapāla by the arm, led him inside, prepared a seat, and asked him to sit down. Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla sat down. Then, seeing that the venerable Raṭṭhapāla was seated, the father approached his wife and said, “Now, you should know that the clansman Raṭṭhapāla has returned home. Quickly prepare food and drink!” On hearing this, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s mother leapt up with great joy and quickly prepared food and drinks. Having prepared food and drink,

she quickly had coins brought out with a handcart and placed on the floor of the central room. They were piled up in such a great heap that a person stand- ing on one side could not see another person sitting on the other side. Having made this great heap of coins, she approached the venerable Raṭṭhapāla and said:^8

Raṭṭhapāla, this is your mother’s part of the property; [besides this,] your father’s property is immeasurable, countless hundreds and thousands of it. All this we now hand over to you, Raṭṭhapāla. Abandon the precepts, cease practicing the path, engage in sensual pleasures and generous giving, and joyfully practice meritorious deeds! Why is that? [Living] conditions with the World-honored One are very difficult, very difficult. Going forth to train in the path is also very difficult. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said to his mother, “I would like to say something now. Would you agree to listen to it?” The venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s mother said, “Young householder, if you have something to say, I will listen to it.” The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said to his mother: You should make new cloth bags, fill them with these coins, carry them by cart to the Ganges River, and then pour them into it at a deep spot. Why is that? Because of these coins people will be made to grieve, worry, and weep. They will not attain happiness. At this the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s mother thought, “Since I cannot, by this means, get my son Raṭṭhapāla to abandon the precepts and cease practicing the path, let me approach his former wives and say this:

Daughters-in-law, decorate yourselves with the necklaces of jade and pearls that you used to wear previously, which highly delighted the clans man Raṭṭhapāla in the past when he was living at home. Having quickly decorated yourselves with these necklaces of jade and pearls, go together to the clansman Raṭṭhapāla. Each of you clasp one of his feet and say this: ‘We are wondering what kind of heavenly maidens are so much better than we are, that our worthy husband abandons us to practice the holy life for their sake.’”

Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s mother approached his former wives and said:

Daughters-in-law, decorate yourselves with the necklaces of jade and pearls that you used to wear previously, which highly delighted the clans- man Raṭṭhapāla in the past when he was living at home. Having quickly decorated yourselves with these necklaces of jade and pearls, go together to the clansman Raṭṭhapāla. Each of you clasp one of his feet and say this: “We are wondering what kind of heavenly maidens are so much better than we are, that our worthy husband abandons us to practice the holy life for their sake.” Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s former wives decorated themselves with the necklaces of jade and pearls that they used to wear previously, which highly delighted the clansman Raṭṭhapāla in the past when he was living at home. Having decorated themselves with these necklaces of jade and pearls, they went together to the clansman Raṭṭhapāla. Each clasped one of his feet and said this:

We are wondering what kind of heavenly maidens are so much better than we are, that our worthy husband abandons us to practice the holy life for their sake. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla told his former wives: Sisters, you should know that I did not practice the holy life for the sake of heavenly maidens. The benefit of practicing the holy life has already been attained. What has to be done according to the Buddha’s instruction has now already been achieved.^9 The venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s [former] wives stood back to one side. Weeping and shedding tears, they said, “We are not our worthy husband’s sisters; yet our worthy husband addresses us as ‘sisters.’” Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla, turning his head to look at his parents, said, “Householders, if food is to be offered, then let it be offered on time. Why trouble one another?” Then his parents rose from their seats and personally offered water for washing. With their own hands they served various kinds of most delicious

dishes, making sure that there was enough to eat, savor, and digest. After the meal was finished, the utensils had been cleared away, and water for washing had been offered, [they] took a low seat and sat down to one side to listen to the Dharma. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla taught his parents the Dharma, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delighting them. Having with countless skillful means taught them the Dharma, having exhorted and inspired them, fully delighting them, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, and uttered these verses: Behold this body adorned With jewelry, necklaces of jade and pearls, Entwined hair made to curl to the right, Eyes and brows painted deep purple and black— This deceives a fool, But not one who is crossing to the farther shore. Using fine silks of varied colors, To adorn this smelly defiled body— This deceives a fool, But not one who is crossing to the farther shore. Smearing the whole body with various perfumes, Dyeing the feet yellow with orpiment— This deceives a fool, But not one who is crossing to the farther shore. A body dressed in pure fine clothes, Adorned like an illusion— This deceives a fool, But not one who is crossing to the farther shore. Severed is the deer snare, Destroyed the deer [trap] gate. I have abandoned the bait and left. Who would enjoy being in a deer’s trap? Having uttered these verses, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla, using his super normal powers, rose into the air and left.^10 Arriving at the Thullakoṭṭhita

forest, he entered the forest, spread his sitting mat beneath a terminalia tree ( _vibhītaka_ ), and sat down cross-legged. At that time King Koravya was sitting in the main hall [of his palace], surrounded by his courtiers. [Earlier he had] expressed his admiration and praise for the venerable Raṭṭhapāla, saying, “If I were to hear that the clansman Raṭṭhapāla had come here to Thullakoṭṭhita, I would certainly go to see him.” Then King Koravya told a hunter, “Go and clean up the Thullakoṭṭhita forest. I want to go out hunting.” Having received the order, the hunter went off to clean up the Thullakoṭṭhita forest. Then while the hunter was cleaning up the Thullakoṭṭhita forest, he saw the venerable Raṭṭhapāla, who had spread his sitting mat beneath a terminalia tree and was sitting there cross-legged. He thought, “The one who was admired and praised by King Koravya and his courtiers when they were sitting together in the main hall is now already here.” Then the hunter, after having cleaned up the Thullakoṭṭhita forest, returned and approached King Koravya. He said:

Your Majesty should know that I have gone and cleaned up the Thul- lakoṭṭhita forest according to Your Majesty’s wish. Before, when Your Majesty was sitting together with the courtiers in the main hall, he expressed his admiration and praise of the venerable Raṭṭhapāla, saying, “If I were to hear that the clansman Raṭṭhapāla had come here to Thul- lakoṭṭhita, I would certainly go to visit him.” The venerable Raṭṭhapāla, the clansman, has spread his sitting mat beneath a terminalia tree in the Thullakoṭṭhita forest and is now sitting [there] cross-legged. If Your Majesty wishes to visit him, let him go there. Hearing this, King Koravya told his charioteer, “Prepare the vehicles quickly. I want to go now to see Raṭṭhapāla.” The charioteer, having received the order, immediately prepared the vehi- cles. That done, he returned and said, “Your Majesty should know that the chariots have been prepared, according to Your Majesty’s wish.” Then King Koravya mounted the chariot and went out toward the Thullakoṭṭhita forest. Seeing the venerable Raṭṭhapāla from afar, he descended from his chariot and approached the venerable Raṭṭhapāla on foot. The venerable Raṭṭhapāla, seeing that King Koravya had come, said: “Your Majesty has now come. Would you like to seat yourself?”^11

King Koravya said: “Although I have now arrived at a place [that belongs] to my own realm, still I would like the clansman Raṭṭhapāla to invite me to sit down.” Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla invited King Koravya, saying: “Now there is a separate seat. May Your Majesty be seated.” Then King Koravya exchanged greetings with the venerable Raṭṭhapāla, stepped back, and sat to one side. He said to Raṭṭhapāla: Did you go forth to train in the path because of some deterioration in your household? If you went forth to train in the path because of some lack of property, Raṭṭhapāla, since King Koravya’s household is endowed with much property, I would give property to Raṭṭhapāla and persuade Raṭṭhapāla to abandon the precepts, cease practicing the path, engage in sensual pleas ures and generous giving, and joyfully practice meritorious deeds. Why is that? Raṭṭhapāla, because the teaching of your master is very difficult; it is also very difficult to go forth to train in the path.^12 The venerable Raṭṭhapāla, hearing that, said, “Your Majesty is now inviting me with what is impure. He is not inviting me with what is pure.” Hearing that, King Koravya asked, “How should I invite Raṭṭhapāla with what is pure, not with what is impure?” The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said: Your Majesty could speak like this: “Raṭṭhapāla, the people of my country are peaceful, happy, without fear, without conflict, without the thorn of violence, without obligation to serve with hard labor, and there is abundant rice, making it easy to beg for alms. Raṭṭhapāla, stay in my country; I will protect you in accordance with the Dharma.” In this way Your Majesty would be inviting me with what is pure, not with what is impure. Hearing that, King Koravya said: I now invite Raṭṭhapāla with what is pure, not with what is impure. The people of my country are peaceful, happy, without fear, without conflict, without the thorn of violence, without obligation to serve with hard labor, and there is abundant rice, making it easy to beg for alms. Raṭṭhapāla, stay in my country; I will protect you in accordance with the Dharma.

Again, Raṭṭhapāla, there are four kinds of deterioration. Because of one or another of these [kinds of] deterioration, some people shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to train in the path. What are the four? They are deterioration by disease, deterio- ration by aging, deterioration of property, and deterioration of relatives.^13 Raṭṭhapāla, what is deterioration by disease? Suppose there is a person who has been ill for a long time with extremely severe pain. He thinks, “I have been ill for a long time with extremely severe pain. I certainly have sensual desires but I am unable to indulge in sensuality. Let me now shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to train in the path.” Later, because of deterioration by disease, he shaves off hair and beard, dons the yellow robe, leaves home out of faith, and goes forth to train in the path. This is what is called deterioration by disease.^14 Raṭṭhapāla, what is deterioration by aging? Suppose there is a person who is old with worn-out faculties, excessively aged, and nearing the end of life. He thinks, “I am old with worn-out faculties, excessively aged, and nearing the end of life. I certainly have sensual desire but I am unable to indulge in sensuality. Let me now shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to train in the path.” Later, because of deterioration by aging, he shaves off hair and beard, dons the yellow robe, leaves home out of faith, and goes forth to train in the path. This is what is called deterioration by aging. Raṭṭhapāla, what is deterioration of property? Suppose there is a person who is poor and powerless. He thinks, “I am poor and powerless. Let me now shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to train in the path.” Later, because of deterioration of property, he shaves off hair and beard, dons the yellow robe, leaves home out of faith, and goes forth to train in the path. This is called deterioration of property. Raṭṭhapāla, what is deterioration of relatives? Suppose there is a person whose [family] lineage has been severed, whose relatives have died and disappeared. He thinks, “My [family] lineage has been severed, my rel- atives have died and disappeared. Let me now shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to train in the

path.” Later, because of deterioration of relatives, he shaves off hair and beard, dons the yellow robe, leaves home out of faith, and goes forth to train in the path. This is what is called deterioration of relatives. Raṭṭhapāla [however,] was without disease in the past, at ease and com fortable. His digestion was balanced—neither too cold nor too hot, correctly balanced and comfortable, all in order and without problems. Consequently, he was able to digest and savor [food] at ease. It was not because of dete rioration by disease that Raṭṭhapāla shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. In the past Raṭṭhapāla was a young lad, with pure black hair and a strong body. At that time he entertained himself much with singing and music, adorned his body, and always liked recreation. At that time none of his relatives wanted to let him train in the path. His parents wept and shed tears of grief and distress as they refused to allow him to go forth to train in the path. Yet he shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. It was not because of deterioration by aging that Raṭṭhapāla shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. Raṭṭhapāla is from the foremost, the biggest, the best, the supreme household with property in Thullakoṭṭhita. It was not because of deteri oration of property that Raṭṭhapāla shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. Raṭṭhapāla has great and eminent relatives and clans living in Thul lakoṭṭhita and its forest [surroundings]. It was not because of deterioration of relatives that Raṭṭhapāla shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. Raṭṭhapāla, regarding these four kinds of deterioration, some people, because of such deterioration, shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to train in the path. I see Raṭṭhapāla as having been free of all these deteriorations that could have caused him to shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to train in the path. Raṭṭhapāla, what did you come to know and see, what did you hear, that [made] you shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to train in the path?

The venerable Raṭṭhapāla answered: Your Majesty, the World-honored One, the Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened, who sees and knows, teaches four things. It was after I had accepted these [four],^15 approved them, and delighted in them, after I had known, seen, and heard them, that I shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. What are the four? Your Majesty, they are these: This world is without protection; there is nothing on which one can depend. This entire world inclines toward aging. This world is impermanent, and one will have to leave it. This world is insufficient, unsatisfying, and driven by craving.^16 King Koravya asked: Raṭṭhapāla just said, “Your Majesty, this world is without protection; there is nothing on which one can depend.” Raṭṭhapāla, I have sons and grand- sons, brothers, and retainers; [I have] elephant troops, chariot troops, cav- alry, and infantry, each able to shoot and drive, awe-inspiring, resolute, and courageous. [I have] princes, mighty men, conquerors, great heroes; I have diviners, strategists, calculators, scholars, and orators. I have courtiers and attendants, memorizers, and knowers of charms. They accom- pany me everywhere and are able to avert anything threatening.^17 As to what Raṭṭhapāla just said—“Your Majesty, this world is without protection; there is nothing on which one can depend”—Raṭṭhapāla, what is the meaning of this? Venerable Raṭṭhapāla answered, “I shall now ask Your Majesty [a question], which he may answer according to his understanding. Does this body of your majesty have any disease?” King Koravya answered, “Raṭṭhapāla, my body now constantly has a dis- ease related to wind.” Venerable Raṭṭhapāla asked: Your Majesty, when this disease related to wind manifests, if there is very severe pain, is the king able to tell his sons, grandsons, and brothers; his

elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry, each of whom is able to shoot and drive and is awe-inspiring, resolute, and courageous; his princes, mighty men, conquerors, great heroes; his diviners, strategists, calculators, scholars, and orators; his courtiers and attendants, memorizers and knowers of charms, “Come, all of you, and relieve me of this very severe pain! Make me free of disease and at ease!”? King Koravya answered, “No. Why is that? This is due to my own [former] deeds. Caused and conditioned by those deeds, I myself must experience the severe pain alone.”^18 The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said: Your Majesty, it was on account of this that the World-honored One said, “This world is without protection; there is nothing on which one can depend.” I accepted this [teaching], approved it, and delighted in it. It was after knowing, seeing, and hearing this that I shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. King Koravya said: As to what Raṭṭhapāla said—“Your Majesty, this world is without pro tection; there is nothing on which one can depend”—Raṭṭhapāla, I too accept it, approve it, and delight in it. Why is that? This world is indeed without protection; there is nothing on which one can depend. King Koravya asked further, “As to what Raṭṭhapāla said, ‘Your Majesty, this entire world inclines toward aging.’ Again, Raṭṭhapāla, what is the meaning of what you just said?” The venerable Raṭṭhapāla answered: Your Majesty, I shall now ask the king [a question], which he may answer according to his understanding. Does Your Majesty consider that when he was aged twenty-four or twenty-five, his speed at that time was as it is now, that his physical strength, bodily figure, and complexion at that time were as they are now? King Koravya answered:

Raṭṭhapāla, I recall that when I was aged twenty-four or twenty-five, nobody surpassed me in speed, physical strength, bodily physique, and complexion. Raṭṭhapāla, I am now very old, with degenerated faculties, excessively aged and near death, a full eighty years old, and [sometimes] unable to get up [by myself].

The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said:

Your Majesty, it was on account of this that the World-honored One said, “This entire world inclines toward aging.” I accepted [this teaching], approved it, and delighted in it. It was after knowing, seeing, and hearing this that I shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path.

King Koravya said:

As to what Raṭṭhapāla said—“Your Majesty, this entire world inclines toward aging”—I too accept it, approve it, and delight in it. Why is that? This entire world does indeed incline toward aging.

King Koravya asked further:

As to what Raṭṭhapāla said, “Your Majesty, this world is impermanent and one will have to leave it.” Again, Raṭṭhapāla, what is the meaning of what you just said?

The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said:

I shall now ask Your Majesty [a question], which he may answer according to his understanding. Does Your Majesty possess the rich Kuru country, along with a rich inner palace and a rich treasury?

King Koravya answered, “That is so.” The venerable Raṭṭhapāla asked further:

Although Your Majesty possesses this rich Kuru country, along with a rich inner palace and a rich treasury, there comes a time when such things prove unreliable and one’s happiness is destroyed. The entire world inevitably ends in death. At that time will Your Majesty be able to take

the rich Kuru country, the rich inner palace, and the rich treasury along with him from this life into the next life? King Koravya answered, “No. Why is that? I alone, without a second, without any companion, will pass on from this life to the next life.”^19 The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said: Your Majesty, it was on account of this that the World-honored One said, “This world is impermanent; one will have to leave it.” I accepted it, approved it, and delighted in it. It was after knowing, seeing, and hearing this that I shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. King Koravya said: As to what Raṭṭhapāla said—“Your Majesty, this world is impermanent; one will have to leave it”—I too accept it, approve it, and delight in it. Why is that? This world is indeed impermanent, and one will have to leave it. King Koravya asked further: As to what Raṭṭhapāla said, “Your Majesty, this world is insufficient, unsatisfying, and driven by craving.” Again, Raṭṭhapāla, what is the mean- ing of what you said? The venerable Raṭṭhapāla answered: I shall now ask Your Majesty [a question], which he may answer according to his understanding. Does Your Majesty possess the rich Kuru country, a rich inner palace, and a rich treasury? King Koravya answered, “That is so.” The venerable Raṭṭhapāla asked further: Although Your Majesty possesses the rich Kuru country, a rich inner palace, and a rich treasury, suppose a person were to come from the east, reliable and trustworthy, not one to deceive the world, and were to tell the king, “I have come from the east and there I saw a country, great, rich, and very populous. Your Majesty could acquire that country and its

resources, people, and labor.” Would Your Majesty wish to acquire that country and rule over it?

King Koravya answered:

Raṭṭhapāla, if I knew that there was such a rich country with its resources, people, and labor, and that I could rule over its people, I would definitely seize it.

[The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said:]

Suppose that, in the same way, a person were to come from the south, or from the west, or from the north, or [even] from the other side of the great ocean, reliable and trustworthy, not one to deceive the world, and were to tell the king, “I have come from the other shore of the great ocean and there I saw a country, great, rich, and very populous. Your Majesty could acquire that country and its resources, people, and labor.” Would Your Majesty wish to acquire that country and rule over it?

King Koravya answered:

Raṭṭhapāla, if I knew that there was such a rich country with its resources, people, and labor, and that I could rule over its people, I would definitely seize it.

The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said:

Your Majesty, it was on account of this that the World-honored One said, “This world is insufficient, unsatisfying, and driven by craving.” I accepted it, approved it, and delighted in it. It was after knowing, seeing, and hearing this that I shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path.

King Koravya said:

Raṭṭhapāla, as to what Raṭṭhapāla said—“Your Majesty, this world is insuf- ficient, unsatisfying, and driven by craving”—I too accept it, approve it, and delight in it. Why is that? This world is indeed insufficient, unsatisfying, and driven by craving.

The venerable Raṭṭhapāla said: Your Majesty, these four things were taught by the World-honored One, the Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened, who sees and knows. I accepted them, approved them, and delighted in them. It was after I had known, seen, and heard them that I shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to train in the path. Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla uttered these verses: I see people in the world Who have property but foolishly do not give generously, Having obtained property, they again seek even more. Stingy and greedy, they accumulate property. A king who has acquired the entire known world And rules it according to his power, Is not satisfied with [ruling only] on this side of the sea, But further seeks [to rule] overseas. For both king and people Life ends before they have abandoned their desires. With hair disheveled, their wives and children cry, “Alas! Dukkha is hard to overcome!” Wrapped in a shroud and buried, Or cremated on a pile of firewood, [People] pass on to the next life according to their deeds. Cremated, they are without wisdom or mindfulness. After death, their property does not follow them, Nor do their wives, children, or servants. For the poor and the rich it is the same; For the foolish and the wise it is also thus. The wise do not nurture grief; Only the foolish harbor depression and worry. Therefore, the wise are victorious, Attaining the path to full awakening.

Deeply attached to continued existence, The foolish do evil deeds. In regard to the Dharma, they act contrary to the Dharma, Seizing from others by force. One with little wisdom imitates others; Being ignorant he does many evil deeds. Going to a womb and into the next life, He will repeatedly endure birth and death. Having been born into this life, And having done many evil deeds alone, He is like a robber tied up by others, Suffering for his own evil deeds. Thus these sentient beings, Passing on to the next life, Suffer for their own deeds, Harmed by the evil that they themselves have done. It is just as fruit falls of itself when ripe; [All people] young and old are like this. They desire dignity and love happiness; Their minds incline according to the beauty or ugliness of forms. [The mind is] bound and harmed by sensual desire; Because of sensual desire fear arises. King, I have seen this and become awakened; And I have understood the excellence of [the way of] the renunciant. Thus spoke the venerable Raṭṭhapāla. Having heard what the venerable Raṭṭhapāla said, King Koravya was delighted and received it respectfully.^20


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma132-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[PE9]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[THAG16]].4


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA132]]
> ◄  [[ma130-bdk]] 📜  [[ma133-bdk]] ►
