---
sutta_code: "MA145"
sutta_title:
  - "瞿默目揵連 "
  - "To Gaṇaka 
Moggallāna"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA145]]
> ◄  [[ma144-bdk]] 📜  [[ma146-bdk]] ►

### 145. The Discourse to Gopaka Moggallāna

Thus have I heard. At one time, not long after the Buddha had attained final nirvana, Venerable Ānanda was staying at Rājagaha. At that time Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, was governing the city of Rājagaha, guarding it against the Vajjis.^126 Then Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, had assigned Gopaka Moggallāna, the field watchman, to [watch over] the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time, when the night was over, at dawn, Venerable Ānanda put on his [outer] robe and took his bowl, wishing to enter Rājagaha to beg for alms- food.^127 Venerable Ānanda thought, “For the time being, never mind about begging for almsfood in Rājagaha. Let me instead approach Gopaka Mog- gallāna, the field watchman.” Then Venerable Ānanda approached Gopaka Moggallāna, the field watchman. On seeing Venerable Ānanda coming in the distance, the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna rose from his seat, arranged his clothes so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward Venerable Ānanda, and said, “Welcome, Ānanda. For a long time you have not come here. Please sit on this seat.” Venerable Ānanda sat on that seat.

The brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna exchanged polite greetings with Ven- erable Ānanda, stepped back, and sat to one side. He said, “Ānanda, I would like to ask something. Will you listen to my question?” Venerable Ānanda replied, “Moggallāna, you may ask it. On hearing it, I will consider it.” Then [Gopaka Moggallāna] asked, “Ānanda, is there any monk who is the equal of the renunciant Gotama?”^128 Just when Venerable Ānanda and the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna were discussing this matter together, Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, [wishing] to encourage his field watchmen in their work, approached Gopaka Moggallāna, the field watchman. Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, saw in the distance Venerable Ānanda sitting with the brahmin Gopaka Mog- gallāna, the field watchman. He approached Venerable Ānanda, exchanged polite greetings, stepped back, and sat to one side. He asked, “Ānanda, what matter have you been discussing with the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna? For what matter have you [two] come together here?” Venerable Ānanda replied, “Vassakāra, the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna asked me, ‘Ānanda, is there any monk who is the equal of the renunciant Gotama?’” Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, asked further, “Ānanda, how did you reply to him?” Venerable Ānanda replied, “Vassakāra, there is no monk at all who is the equal of the World-honored One.” Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, asked further: Yes indeed, Ānanda, there is no monk who is the equal of the World-hon- ored One. Is there a monk who was appointed by the renunciant Gotama when he was alive [thus]: “After my final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,” so that you now take refuge in him? Venerable Ānanda replied: Vassakāra, there is no monk at all who was appointed by the World-honored One, who knows and sees, the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awak- ened, when he was alive [thus]: “After my final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,” so that we now take refuge in him.

Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, asked further: Yes, indeed, Ānanda, there is no monk who is the equal of the World-hon- ored One; and there is also no monk who was appointed by the renunciant Gotama when he was alive [thus]: “After my final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,” so that you now take refuge in him. Is there, however, a monk who is honored by the assembly of the Sangha [thus]: “After the World-honored One’s final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,” so that you now take refuge in him? Venerable Ānanda replied: Vassakāra, there is no monk who is honored by the assembly of the Sangha [thus]: “After the World-honored One’s final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,” so that we now take refuge in him. Vassakāra, the great minister of Magadha, asked further: Yes indeed, Ānanda, there is no monk who is the equal of the World- honored One; and there is also no monk who was appointed by the renun- ciant Gotama when he was alive [thus]: “After my final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,” so that you now take refuge in him; and there is also no monk who is honored by the assembly of the Sangha [thus]: “After the World-honored One’s final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,” so that you now take refuge in him. In that case, Ānanda, are you without a refuge [to ensure] communal harmony, freedom from quarrel, peace, unity in a single teaching, blending like water and milk, joyfully associating in practice, just as when the renunciant Gotama was alive? Venerable Ānanda replied, “Vassakāra, do not speak like this, saying that we have no refuge. Why is that? We do indeed have a refuge.” Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, said: Ānanda, what you said earlier does not match what you have said later. Until just now Ānanda said this, “There is no monk who is the equal of the World-honored One; and there is also no monk whom the World-hon- ored One, who knows and sees, the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully

awakened, appointed when he was alive [thus]: ‘After my final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,’ so that we now take refuge in him; and there is also no monk who is honored by the assembly of the Sangha [thus]: ‘After the World-honored One’s final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,’ so that we now take refuge in him.” Ānanda, what is the cause and condition that you now say, “We do have a refuge”? Venerable Ānanda replied: Vassakāra, we do not take refuge in a person; we take refuge in the Dharma. Vassakāra, if some of us are dwelling in reliance on a village or town, then on the fifteenth day, at the time for reciting the code of rules, we gather and sit in <one> place.^129 If there is a certain monk who is knowl edgeable in the Dharma, we invite that monk to teach us the Dharma.^130 If that sangha is pure, we all rejoice together and respectfully receive the teachings of that monk. If there is an impure person in the sangha, we instruct [the person] in accordance with what is set forth in the Dharma. Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, said: So, Ānanda, the instruction [to the impure monk] is given not by you, but rather by the Dharma. In this way, Ānanda, with little or much of the Dharma you can continue to exist for a long time. In this way, Ānanda, you are in communal harmony, free of quarrel, at peace, at unity in a single teaching, blending like water and milk, joyfully associating in practice, just as when the renunciant Gotama was alive. Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, asked further, “Ānanda, is there someone that you [bhikkhus] respect?” Venerable Ānanda replied, “Vassakāra, there is someone that we respect.” Vassakāra said: Ānanda, what you said earlier does not match what you have said later. Until just now Ānanda said this, “There is no monk who is the equal of the World-honored One; and there is also no monk whom the World-hon ored One, who knows and sees, the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, appointed when he was alive [thus]: ‘After my final nirvana,

this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,’ so that we now take refuge in him; and there is also no monk who was honored by an assembly of the Sangha [thus]: ‘After the World-honored One’s final nirvana, this monk should be the refuge of all the bhikkhus,’ so that we now take refuge in him.” Ānanda, what is the cause, what is the reason why you now say: “There is someone that we respect”?

Venerable Ānanda replied:

Vassakāra, the World-honored One, who knows and sees, the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, taught us ten principles of respect. If we see these ten principles in a monk, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk. What are the ten? Vassakāra, a monk cultivates morality and guards [against breaking] the code of rules, adopts proper conduct and manners, always dreading the slightest fault; he upholds the training in the precepts. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such superior practice of higher morality, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk. Again, Vassakāra, a monk is widely trained in having learned much, keeping it in mind, and not forgetting it. He has accumulated wide learning of that which is called the Dharma, which is sublime in the beginning, sublime in the middle, and also sublime in the end, with its meaning and phrasing, endowed with purity, and revealing the holy life. Thus he is widely trained in all [aspects] of the Dharma, has learnt much and has recited and reviewed it a thousand times, reflected on it, and contemplated it with clear vision and penetrative realization. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such superior learning, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk.^131 Again, Vassakāra, a monk acts as a good friend, acts as a good com- panion, acts as a good comrade. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such supe- rior good friendship, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk. Again, Vassakāra, a monk delights in dwelling in seclusion and is accomplished in the two types of seclusion, bodily and mental. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such superior delight in dwelling in seclusion, then

we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk. Again, Vassakāra, a monk delights in sitting in meditation, properly practices inner tranquility, is never separated from application of the mind, is accomplished in insight and increasingly dwells in emptiness. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such superior delight in sitting in meditation, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk. Again, Vassakāra, a monk is contented, taking robes [just] to cover the body, taking food [just] to sustain the physical body. Wherever he goes, he takes his robes and bowl with him, without concerns or longings, like a wild goose that flies through the air with [just] its two wings.^132 In these ways a monk is contented, taking robes [just] to cover the body, taking food [just] to sustain the physical body. Wherever he goes, he takes his robes and bowl with him, without concerns or longings. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such superior contentment, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk. Again, Vassakāra, a monk continuously practices mindfulness, is accom plished in right mindfulness, always remembering, not forgetting, what was done long ago and what was heard long ago. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such superior possession of right mindfulness, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk. Again, Vassakāra, a monk constantly and energetically practices to abandon evil and unwholesome [states] and to develop wholesome states, persistently arousing his mind, single-mindedly and steadfastly, for the sake of [devel oping] the roots of wholesomeness with relentless energy. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such superior diligence, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk. Again, Vassakāra, a monk cultivates comprehension and wisdom. Observing the rise and fall of phenomena, he attains such comprehension, noble penetrative knowledge, and discriminative understanding as will truly put an end to dukkha. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk such superior wisdom, then we all revere him, respect him, support him, esteem and emulate him, and show high regard for that monk.

Again, Vassakāra, a monk has eradicated all taints and attained the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom. He dwells having known by himself, having awakened by himself, having realized by him- self: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of exis- tence,” knowing this as it really is. Vassakāra, if we see in a monk the eradication of the taints, then we all revere, respect, support, esteem and emulate, and show high regard for that monk. Vassakāra, the World-honored One who knows and sees, the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, taught us these ten principles of respect. Vassakāra, if we see a monk practicing these ten principles, then we all revere, respect, support, esteem and emulate, and show high regard for that monk. At this, the great assembly [of Vassakāra’s retainers] exclaimed loudly: The straight path is to be developed, it is not to be left undeveloped! If some- one develops the straight path, which is not to be left undeveloped, then they are following the arahants of the world who are revered, respected, supported, and highly regarded. Because you venerable ones are able to develop the straight path, which can be developed, therefore you are revered in the world as arahants, respected, supported, and highly regarded.^133 Then Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, and his retainers asked, “Ānanda, where are you dwelling now?” Venerable Ānanda replied, “I am now dwelling here at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.” [Vassakāra said]: Ānanda, the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary, is delightful, well maintained, and pleasing.^134 It is free of noise during the day and quiet at night, free of mosquitos and gadflies, and also free of flies and fleas; it is neither [too] cold nor [too] hot. Ānanda, do you delight in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary? Venerable Ānanda replied: It is like this, Vassakāra; it is like this, Vassakāra. The Bamboo Grove,

the Squirrels’ Sanctuary, is delightful, well maintained, and pleasing. It is free of noise during the day and quiet at night, free of mosquitos and gadflies, and also free of flies and fleas; it is neither [too] cold nor [too] hot. Vassakāra, I delight in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. Why is that? Because the World-honored One commended it.^135 At that time the great general Upananda was among that gathering. Great General Upananda said:

It is like this, Vassakāra; it is like this, Vassakāra. The Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary is delightful, well maintained, and pleasing. It is free of noise during the day and quiet at night, free of mosquitos and gad- flies, and also free of flies and fleas; it is neither [too] cold nor [too] hot. The venerable one delights in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. Why is that? Because this venerable one practices application of the mind, delights in application of the mind.^136 Hearing this, Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, said: Great General Upananda, in former times the renunciant Gotama was stay- ing in the pleasure park of Kimbilā.^137 Great General Upananda, at that time I frequently went there to visit the renunciant Gotama. Why is that? [Because] the renunciant Gotama practiced application of the mind, delighted in application of the mind. He praised all application of the mind. Hearing this, Venerable Ānanda said: Vassakāra, do not say, “The renunciant Gotama praised all application of the mind.” Why is that? [Because] the World-honored One praised some [kinds of] application of the mind but did not praise other [kinds of] appli- cation of the mind.^138 Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, asked further, “Ānanda, as to the application of the mind that the renunciant Gotama did not praise, what type of application of the mind did he not praise?” Venerable Ānanda replied: Vassakāra, suppose that someone is entangled in sensual desire and does not really know how to get out of that arisen sensual desire. Because of

being obstructed by sensual desire, they apply their mind, increasingly apply their mind, repeatedly apply their mind. Vassakāra, this is the first [kind of] application of the mind that the World-honored One did not praise. Again, Vassakāra, suppose that someone is entangled in ill will and does not really know how to get out of that arisen ill will. Because of being obstructed by ill will, they apply their mind, increasingly apply their mind, repeatedly apply their mind. Vassakāra, this is the second [kind of] application of the mind that the World-honored One did not praise. Again, Vassakāra, suppose that someone is entangled in sloth-and- torpor and does not really know how to get out of that arisen sloth-and- torpor. Because of being obstructed by sloth-and-torpor, they apply their mind, increasingly apply their mind, repeatedly apply their mind. Vassakāra, this is the third [kind of] application of the mind that the World-honored One did not praise. [Again, Vassakāra, suppose that someone is entangled in restlessness- and-worry and does not really know how to get out of that arisen restless- ness-and-worry. Because of being obstructed by restlessness-and-worry, they apply their mind, increasingly apply their mind, repeatedly apply their mind. Vassakāra, this is the fourth kind of application of the mind that the World-honored One did not praise.]^139 Again, Vassakāra, suppose that someone is entangled in doubt and does not really know how to get out of that arisen doubt. Because of being obstructed by doubt, they apply their mind, increasingly apply their mind, repeatedly apply their mind. Vassakāra, this is the ^140 [kind of] application of the mind that the World-honored One did not praise. Vas- sakāra, the World-honored One did not praise these five kinds of] appli- cation of the mind. Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, said: Ānanda, these [kinds of] application of the mind are dislikable,^141 they are occasions for abhorrence. The renunciant Gotama did not praise them. Why is that? Because he was perfectly and completely awakened. Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, asked further, “Ānanda, what [kind of] application of the mind did the renunciant Gotama praise?” Venerable Ānanda replied:

Vassakāra, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwhole some states... up to... a monk dwells having attained the fourth absorp tion. Vassakāra, the World-honored One praised these four applications of the mind. Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, said: Ānanda, these four [kinds of] application of the mind are praiseworthy; they are occasions for praise. The renunciant Gotama praised them. Why is that? Because he was perfectly and completely awakened. Ānanda, I have numerous matters to attend to. I ask leave to return. Venerable Ānanda said, “[If] you wish to return, do as you wish.” Then Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, having heard what Ven erable Ānanda had said, received it well and kept it well in mind. He rose from his seat, circumambulated Venerable Ānanda three times, and left. Then, soon after Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, had left, the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna said, “Ānanda, [I assume] you will not be answering at all the question I asked [earlier].” Venerable Ānanda said, “That is so, Moggallāna. I will not be answering it [since I answered the same question asked by Vassakāra].”^142 The brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna said, “Ānanda, I have another question. Will you listen to my question?” Venerable Ānanda replied, “Moggallāna, you may ask. On hearing it, I will consider it.” The brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna asked: Ānanda, what is the difference between the liberation of the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, and the liberation of an arahant who is liberated by wisdom? Which of these two liberations is superior?^143 Venerable Ānanda replied: Moggallāna, there is no difference between the liberation of the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, and the liberation of an arahant who is liberated by wisdom. Neither of these two liberations is superior. The brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna said, “Ānanda, please take your meal here!” Venerable Ānanda accepted by remaining silent.

Knowing that [Ānanda] had accepted by remaining silent, the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna rose from his seat and personally brought water for wash- ing [of hands], and personally offered various kinds of fine dishes, delicious, plentiful, and easy to digest, making sure that [Ānanda] was satisfied. After the meal, he gathered up the utensils, again brought water for washing, and then seated himself on a small seat to one side to listen to the Dharma. Ven- erable Ānanda expounded the Dharma to him, exhorting and inspiring him, fully delighting him by teaching him the Dharma with countless skillful means. Thus said Venerable Ānanda. Having been exhorted, inspired, and fully delighted, Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, his retainers, and the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna were delighted on having heard what Venerable Ānanda had said and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma145-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA145]]
> ◄  [[ma144-bdk]] 📜  [[ma146-bdk]] ►
