---
sutta_code: "MA14"
sutta_title:
  - "羅云 "
  - "Rāhula"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA14]]
> ◄  [[ma13-bdk]] 📜  [[ma15-bdk]] ►

### 14. The Discourse to Rāhula

Thus have I heard: At one time, the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time, Venerable Rāhula was also staying at Rājagaha, in the Hot Spring Grove. Then the World-honored One, when the night was over, at dawn, having put on his robes and taken his almsbowl, went into Rājagaha to beg for food. Having finished begging for food, he went to the Hot Spring Grove, the place where the venerable Rāhula was staying. When Venerable Rāhula saw the Buddha coming in the distance, he forthwith went to greet him, took the Buddha’s [outer] robe and bowl, made a seat ready, and set out water for washing feet. The Buddha, having washed his feet, sat down on the seat prepared by Rāhula. Then the World-honored One took the water vessel and, having poured out the water until only a little was left, asked: “Rāhula, did you see me taking this water vessel and pouring out the water until only a little was left?” Rāhula replied: “Yes, I saw it, World-honored One.” The Buddha told Rāhula: In the same way, the practice of those who knowingly speak falsehood without embarrassment or regret, without shame or scruple, is of little [worth], I say. Rāhula, there is no evil they would not do. Therefore, Rāhula, you should train yourself like this: “Even in jest I shall not speak falsehood.” The World-honored One again took the water vessel containing a little water and, having completely discarded the water, asked: “Rāhula, now again, did you see me take this water vessel containing a little water, and completely discard the water?” Rāhula replied: “Yes, I saw it, World-honored One.” The Buddha told Rāhula: In the same way, the practice of those who knowingly speak falsehood without embarrassment or regret, without shame or scruple, is com pletely discarded, I say. Rāhula, there is no evil they would not do. Therefore, Rāhula, you should train yourself like this: “Even in jest I shall not speak falsehood.”

The World-honored One again took the empty water vessel, tipped it over on the ground, and asked: “Rāhula, now again, did you see me take the empty water vessel, and tip it over on the ground?” Rāhula replied: “Yes, I saw it, World-honored One.” The Buddha told Rāhula: In the same way, the practice of those who knowingly speak falsehood without embarrassment or regret, without shame or scruple, is tipped over, I say. Rāhula, there is no evil they would not do. Therefore, Rāhula, you should train yourself like this: “Even in jest I shall not speak falsehood.” The World-honored One again took the tipped water vessel and, having turned it bottom up, asked: “Rāhula, did you see me again take the toppled water vessel and turn it bottom up?” Rāhula replied: “Yes, I saw it, World-honored One.” The Buddha told Rāhula: In the same way, the practice of those who knowingly speak falsehood without embarrassment or regret, without shame or scruple, is turned bottom up, I say. Rāhula, there is no evil they would not do. Therefore, Rāhula, you should train yourself like this: “Even in jest I shall not speak falsehood.” Rāhula, it is just as if a king had a great elephant who, when going into battle, uses his forefeet, his hindfeet, his tail, shoulders, back, flanks, neck, head, ears, and tusks— everything except his trunk, which he keeps protected. Seeing this, the elephant trainer would think in this way: The king’s great elephant still cherishes his life. Why so? Because when going into battle, the king’s great elephant uses his forefeet, his hindfeet, his tail, shoulders, back, flanks, neck, head, ears, and tusks—everything except his trunk, which he keeps protected. Rāhula, if when going into battle, the king’s great elephant uses his forefeet, his hindfeet, his tail, shoulders, back, flanks, neck, head, ears, tusks, and also his trunk—if he uses everything—then on seeing this the elephant trainer would think in this way:

The king’s elephant no longer cherishes his life. Why so? Because when going into battle, the king’s great elephant uses his forefeet, his hindfeet, his tail, shoulders, back, flanks, neck, head, ears, tusks, and also his trunk; he uses everything. Rāhula, if the king’s great elephant, when going into battle, uses his forefeet, his hindfeet, his tail, shoulders, back, flanks, neck, head, ears, tusks, and also his trunk—if he uses everything—then Rāhula, I say that when going into battle, there is no evil that the king’s great elephant would not do. So too, Rāhula, those who knowingly speak falsehood without embarrassment or regret, without shame or scruple, Rāhula, I say that there is no evil they would not do. Therefore, Rāhula, you should train yourself like this: “Even in jest I shall not speak falsehood.” Then, the World-honored One uttered the following verses: He who transgresses this one law Against speaking falsehood: Not fearing the next world, There is no evil he would not do. Better to swallow an iron ball, Burning hot like fire, Than to transgress the precepts While accepting the offerings of the faithful. If you fear suffering, Not even wishing to think of it, Whether secretly or openly, Perform no evil deed. An unwholesome deed, Already done or being done, Can never be escaped; One cannot hide from [its result]. Having uttered these verses, the Buddha asked Rāhula further: “What do you think, Rāhula? For what purpose do people use a mirror?”

Venerable Rāhula replied: “World-honored One, they wish to examine their face, to see if it is clean or not.” [The Buddha continued:] Similarly, Rāhula, if you are about to perform a bodily action, then examine that bodily action: “I am about to perform a bodily action. Is this bodily action pure or impure? Am I doing it for myself or for another?” Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “I am about to perform a bodily action, and that bodily action is impure, either for myself or for another;^78 it is unwholesome, has suffering as its fruit, and will result in the experience of suffering”—then, Rāhula, you should abandon that bodily action that you are about to perform. [But,] Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “I am about to perform a bodily action, and that bodily action is pure, either for myself or for another;^79 it is whole- some, has happiness as its fruit, and will result in the experience of happiness”—then, Rāhula, you should approve of that bodily action that you are about to perform. Rāhula, if you are performing a bodily action, then examine that bodily action: “I am performing a bodily action. Is this bodily action pure or impure? Am I doing it for myself or for another?” Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “I am performing a bodily action, and this bodily action is impure, either for myself or for another; it is unwholesome, has suffering as its fruit, and will result in the expe- rience of suffering”—then, Rāhula, you should abandon that bodily action that you are performing. [But,] Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “I am performing a bodily action, and this bodily action is pure, either for myself or for another; it is wholesome, has happiness as its fruit, and will result in the experience of happiness”—then, Rāhula, you should approve of [and remember] that bodily action that you are performing. Rāhula, if you have performed a bodily action, then examine that bodily action: “I have performed a bodily action. That bodily action, which is already past, having ceased completely or changed, was it pure or impure? Did I do it for myself or for another?”

Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “I have performed a bodily action, which is already past, having ceased completely or changed. That bodily action was impure, either for myself or for another; it was unwholesome, has suffering as its fruit, and will result in the experience of suffering”—then, Rāhula, you should approach a good friend, a companion in the holy life, and wholeheartedly reveal that bodily action that you have done. You should confess and declare it, being careful not to hide it, and you should exercise greater restraint [in the future]. [But,] Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “I have performed a bodily action, which is already past, having ceased completely or changed. That bodily action was pure, either for myself or for another; it was wholesome, has happiness as its fruit, and will result in the experience of happiness”—then, Rāhula, you should dwell happily day and night, with right mindfulness and right attentiveness. (It is the same for verbal actions.) Rāhula, if with a past deed as its condition a mental action arises, then examine that mental action: “With a past deed as its condition, a mental action arose. Was that mental action pure or impure? Did I do it for myself or for another?” Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “With a past deed as its con dition, a mental action arose. That mental action, which is already past, having ceased completely or changed, was impure, either for myself or for another; it was unwholesome, has suffering as its fruit, and will result in the experience of suffering”—then, Rāhula, you should aban don that past mental action. [But,] Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “With a past deed as its condition, a mental action arose. That mental action, which is already past, having ceased completely or changed, was pure, either for myself or for another; it was wholesome, has hap piness as its fruit, and will result in the experience of happiness”— then, Rāhula, you should approve of that past mental action. Rāhula, if with a future deed as its condition a mental action will arise, then examine that mental action: “With a future deed as its con dition, a mental action will arise. Will that mental action be pure or impure? Will I do it for myself or for another?” Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “With a future deed as its condition, a mental action will

arise. That mental action will be impure, either for myself or for another; it will be unwholesome, will have suffering as its fruit, and will result in the experience of suffering”—then, Rāhula, you should abandon that future mental action. [But,] Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “With a future deed as its condition a mental action will arise. That mental action will be pure, either for myself or for another; it will be wholesome, will have happiness as its fruit, and will result in the expe- rience of happiness”—then, Rāhula, you should approve of that future mental action. Rāhula, if with a present deed as its condition a mental action arises, then examine that mental action: “With a present deed as its condition, a mental action is arising. Is this mental action pure or impure? Am I doing it for myself or for another?” Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “With a present deed as its condition, a mental action is arising. This mental action is impure, either for myself or for another; it is unwholesome, has suffering as its fruit, and will result in the experience of suffering”—then, Rāhula, you should abandon that present mental action. [But,] Rāhula, if on examining it you know: “With a present deed as its condition a mental action is arising. This mental action is pure, either for myself or for another; it is wholesome, has happiness as its fruit, and will result in the experience of happiness”—then, Rāhula, you should approve that present mental action. Rāhula, whatever renunciants and brahmins in the past have repeat- edly examined and repeatedly purified their bodily, verbal, and mental actions, all of them have repeatedly examined and repeatedly purified their bodily, verbal, and mental actions in this very way. Rāhula, whatever renunciants and brahmins in the future will repeatedly examine and repeatedly purify their bodily, verbal, and men- tal actions, all of them will repeatedly examine and repeatedly purify their bodily, verbal, and mental actions in this very way. Whatever renunciants and brahmins in the present repeatedly exam- ine and repeatedly purify their bodily, verbal, and mental actions, all of them repeatedly examine and repeatedly purify their bodily, verbal, and mental actions in this very way. Rāhula, you should train yourself

like this: “I too repeatedly examine and repeatedly purify my bodily, verbal, and mental actions in this very way.” Then the World-honored One uttered further verses, saying: Bodily action, verbal action, And mental action, Rāhula, Whether wholesome or unwholesome by nature, You should constantly examine them. Knowingly to speak falsehood, Do not do it, Rāhula. Shaven-headed, you live off others, How could you speak falsehood? Overturning the law of renunciants, Empty, without truthfulness, Such is speaking falsehood, With an unrestrained mouth. Therefore, not to speak falsehood, O son of the rightly Awakened One, This is the law of renunciants, [Thus] you should train, O Rāhula. Prosperity and happiness all around, Safety and fearlessness, Rāhula, to attain that, Do not harm others. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Ven- erable Rāhula and the [other] bhikkhus were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma14-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN147]], [[MN62]], [[MN65]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA14]]
> ◄  [[ma13-bdk]] 📜  [[ma15-bdk]] ►
