---
sutta_code: "MA158"
sutta_title:
  - "頭那 "
  - "To Doṇa"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA158]]
> ◄  [[ma157-bdk]] 📜  [[ma159-bdk]] ►

### 158. The Discourse to Doṇa

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the brahmin Doṇa, while roaming around in the afternoon, approached the Buddha, exchanged polite greetings, stepped back, and sat to

one side. The World-honored One asked him,^269 “Doṇa, if someone asks you if you are a brahmin, do you say you are a brahmin and call yourself one?” The brahmin Doṇa replied: Gotama, one can rightly call himself a brahmin if he is born of parents who are of pure descent, if for seven generations on both his father’s and his mother’s sides there has been uninterrupted continuity of births without blemish; and if he has learned much and retained it, is able to recite it, and is a master of the four Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth.^270 Gotama, one who can rightly call himself a brahmin is myself. Why is that? I am born of parents of pure descent; for seven generations on both my father’s and my mother’s sides there has been uninterrupted con- tinuity of births without blemish; and I have learned much and retained it, am able to recite it, and am a master of the four Vedas with their vocab- ularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth. The World-honored One said: Doṇa, I will now ask you [a question]; answer according to your under- standing. Doṇa, what do you think? Those ancient brahmins who have died and passed away, reciters of the sacred texts, who promulgated the sacred texts and recited the Vedas—namely, Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamataggi, Aṅgīrasa, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, Bhāradvāja, and Bhagu—they have designated five types of brahmins: There are brahmins who are like Brahmā, there are brahmins who are like a _deva,_ there are brahmins who do not overstep the boundaries, there are brahmins who overstep the boundaries, and there are brahmins who are outcastes as the fifth. Doṇa, of these five types of brahmins, which one are you? Doṇa said: Gotama has spoken about this matter in brief, without explaining its details. I am unable to understand it. May the renunciant Gotama explain it well so that I understand its meaning.

The World-honored One said, “Doṇa, listen closely and pay proper atten tion, I will analyze it for you in detail.” Doṇa said, “Indeed, Gotama.” The brahmin Doṇa listened to receive the instruction. The Buddha said: Doṇa, how is a brahmin like Brahmā? A brahmin is born of parents of pure descent; for seven generations on both his father’s and his mother’s sides there has been uninterrupted continuity of births without blemish. For forty-eight years he practices the holy life as a young man, wishing to acquire the sacred texts, to recite the canonical texts. Having acquired the sacred texts, recited the canonical texts, he supports his teacher by begging for wealth in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma. What is “[in accordance with the Dharma, not] contrary to the Dharma”? [It is] not by farming, not by trade, not by [compiling] books, not by cal culating, not by accounting, not by engraving, not by handwriting, not by composing regulations, not by [compiling] discourses, not by poetry, not by wielding sword or staff, not by attending to the king’s affairs, [but] by begging in accordance with the Dharma, he begs for wealth to support his teacher.^271 Having offered wealth [to his teacher],^272 with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwells [mentally] pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions and above and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or contention, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well-cultivated. In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equa nimity, free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or conflict, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeas urable, and well-cultivated. Doṇa, in this way a brahmin is like Brahmā. Doṇa, how is a brahmin like a deva? A brahmin is born of parents of pure descent; for seven generations on both his father’s and his mother’s sides there has been uninterrupted continuity of births without blemish. For forty-eight years he practices the holy life as a young man, wishing to

acquire the sacred texts, to recite the canonical texts. Having acquired the sacred texts, recited the canonical texts, he supports his teacher by begging for wealth in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma. What is “[in accordance with the Dharma, not] contrary to the Dharma”? Not by farming, not by trade, not by [compiling] books, not by calculating, not by accounting, not by engraving, not by handwriting, not by composing regulations, not by [compiling] discourses, not by poetry, not by wielding sword or staff, not by attending to the king’s affairs, but by begging in accordance with the Dharma, he begs for wealth to support his teacher. Having offered wealth [to his teacher], he practices sublime bodily conduct... verbal... sublime mental conduct. Having practiced sublime bodily conduct... verbal... sublime mental conduct, at the destruction of the body at death he will certainly go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven.^273 Doṇa, in this way a brahmin is like the _deva_ s. Doṇa, how does a brahmin not overstep the boundaries? A brahmin is born of parents of pure descent; for seven generations on both his father’s and his mother’s sides there has been uninterrupted continuity of births without blemish. For forty-eight years he practices the holy life as a young man, wishing to acquire the sacred texts, to recite the canonical texts. Having acquired the sacred texts, recited the canonical texts, he supports his teacher by begging for wealth in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma. What is “[in accordance with the Dharma, not] contrary to the Dharma”? Not by farming, not by trade, not by [compiling] books, not by calculating, not by accounting, not by engraving, not by handwriting, not by composing regulations, not by [compiling] discourses, not by poetry, not by wielding sword or staff, not by attending to the king’s affairs, but by begging in accordance with the Dharma, he begs for wealth to support his teacher. Having offered wealth [to his teacher], he seeks a wife for himself in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma. What is “[in accordance with the Dharma, not] contrary to the Dharma”? A brahmin does not approach a brahmin woman with intentions such as these: to increase mutual craving and to have [sexual] union. He approaches a brah- min woman, not a nonbrahmin woman, nor a warrior woman, nor one who is pregnant, nor one who is nursing.

Doṇa, for what reason does a brahmin not approach [a woman] who is pregnant? So that this man and woman will not become known as impure and licentious.^274 For this reason a brahmin does not approach [a woman] who is pregnant. Doṇa, for what reason does a brahmin not approach [a woman] who is nursing? So that this man and woman will not become known as impure and angry. For this reason a brahmin does not approach [a woman] who is nursing. Doṇa, he approaches [a woman] not for the sake of wealth, nor for the sake of pride, nor for the sake of adornment, nor for the sake of decoration, but just for the sake of a son. Once a son is born, [the brahmin] is estab lished within the boundaries of the conventions of the brahmins of old, upholding them and not overstepping them. Doṇa, in this way a brahmin does not overstep the boundaries. Doṇa, how does a brahmin overstep the boundaries? A brahmin is born of parents of pure descent; for seven generations on both his father’s and his mother’s sides there has been uninterrupted continuity of births without blemish. For forty-eight years he practices the holy life as a young man, wishing to acquire the sacred texts, to recite the canonical texts. Having acquired the sacred texts, recited the canonical texts, he supports his teacher by begging for wealth in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma. What is “[in accordance with the Dharma, not] contrary to the Dharma”? Not by farming, not by trade, not by [compiling] books, not by calculating, not by accounting, not by engraving, not by handwriting, not by composing regulations, not by [compiling] discourses, not by poetry, not by wielding sword or staff, not by attending to the king’s affairs, but by begging in accordance with the Dharma, he begs for wealth to support his teacher. Having offered wealth [to his teacher], he seeks a wife for himself in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma. What is “[in accordance with the Dharma, not] contrary to the Dharma”? A brahmin does not approach a brahmin woman with intentions such as these: to increase mutual craving and to have [sexual] union. He approaches a brah min woman, not a nonbrahmin woman, nor a warrior woman, nor one who is pregnant, nor one who is nursing.

Doṇa, for what reason does a brahmin not approach [a woman] who is pregnant? So that this man and woman will not become known as impure and licentious. For this reason a brahmin does not approach [a woman] who is pregnant. Doṇa, for what reason does a brahmin not approach [a woman] who is nursing? So that this man and woman will not become known as impure and angry. For this reason a brahmin does not approach [a woman] who is nursing. Doṇa, he approaches [a woman] not for the sake of wealth, nor for the sake of pride, nor for the sake of adornment, nor for the sake of decoration, but just for the sake of a son. [However,] once a son is born, he does not remain within the boundaries of the conventions of the brahmins of old, not upholding them but overstepping them.^275 Doṇa, in this way a brahmin oversteps the boundaries. Doṇa, how is a brahmin an outcaste [among] brahmins? A brahmin is born of parents of pure descent; for seven generations on both his father’s and his mother’s sides there has been uninterrupted continuity of births without blemish. For forty-eight years he practices the holy life as a young man, wishing to acquire the sacred texts, to recite the canonical texts. Having acquired the sacred texts, recited the canonical texts, he supports his teacher by begging for wealth in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma. What is “[in accordance with the Dharma, not] contrary to the Dharma”? Not by farming, not by trade, not by [compiling] books, not by calculating, not by accounting, not by engraving, not by handwriting, not by composing regulations, not by [compiling] discourses, not by poetry, not by wielding sword or staff, not by attending to the king’s affairs, but by begging in accordance with the Dharma, he begs for wealth to support his teacher. Having offered wealth [to his teacher], he seeks a wife for himself in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma. What is “[in accordance with the Dharma, not] contrary to the Dharma”? A brahmin does not approach a brahmin woman with intentions such as these: to increase mutual craving and to have [sexual] union. He approaches a brah- min woman, not a nonbrahmin woman, nor a warrior woman, nor one who is pregnant, nor one who is nursing.

Doṇa, for what reason does a brahmin not approach [a woman] who is pregnant? So that this man and woman will not become known as impure and licentious. For this reason a brahmin does not approach [a woman] who is pregnant. Doṇa, for what reason does a brahmin not approach [a woman] who is nursing? So that this man and woman will not become known as impure and angry. For this reason a brahmin does not approach [a woman] who is nursing. Doṇa, he approaches [a woman] not for the sake of wealth, nor for the sake of pride, nor for the sake of adornment, nor for the sake of decoration, but just for the sake of a son. Once a son is born, he undertakes affairs related to kings, affairs related to thieves, affairs related to those who are on the wrong path, saying, “Brahmins should undertake all affairs; brah- mins are not defiled by this, they are not contaminated by it. They are just like fire, which burns what is pure and burns what is impure.” [If someone says] “Brahmins should not undertake any affairs,” [we reply,] “Brahmins are not defiled by this; they are not contaminated by it.” Doṇa, in this way a brahmin is an outcaste [among] brahmins.^276 Doṇa, of these five types of brahmin, which one are you?^277 Doṇa said: Gotama, I am not entitled to say I am even the most inferior [type of] brahmin, the outcaste, let alone the others. World-honored One, I have understood. Well-gone One, I have comprehended. World-honored One, from now on I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of bhikkhus. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until the end of life, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life.^278 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the brahmin Doṇa was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma158-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN1.314]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA158]]
> ◄  [[ma157-bdk]] 📜  [[ma159-bdk]] ►
