---
sutta_code: "MA155"
sutta_title:
  - "須達哆 "
  - "About Velāma"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA155]]
> ◄  [[ma154-bdk]] 📜  [[ma156-bdk]] ►

### 155. The Discourse about Velāma

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the householder Sudatta approached the Buddha,^247 paid hom- age with his head, stepped back, and sat to one side. The World-honored One asked him, “Householder, does your family prac- tice almsgiving?” The householder Sudatta replied: Yes indeed, World-honored One. My family practices almsgiving, but we are unable to [give] what is excellent. [What we give as almsfood] is very coarse, just rice bran with husks, sesame soup, and a slice of ginger. The World-honored One said: Householder, whether one gives coarse food or gives excellent food, both bring their results indeed. Householder, if one gives what is coarse and gives without faith, gives without deliberation, gives but not with one’s own hands, gives without going in person, gives without due consideration, gives without sincerity, gives without contemplating the fruits and results of one’s actions, then one should contemplate receiving the following kinds of results: One’s mind will not enjoy getting an excellent house; it will not enjoy getting an excellent chariot; it will not enjoy getting excellent clothing; it will not enjoy getting excellent food and drink; it will not enjoy getting whatever is excellent by way of the five strands of sensuality.^248 Why is that? Because one is practicing giving without sincerity. House- holder, one should understand that one will receive these kinds of results. Householder, if one gives what is coarse but gives with faith, gives with deliberation, gives with one’s own hands, gives having gone in person, gives with due consideration, gives with sincerity, gives having contemplated the fruits and results of one’s actions, then one should contemplate receiving the following kinds of results: One’s mind will enjoy getting an excellent house; it will enjoy getting an excellent chariot; it will enjoy getting excellent clothes; it will enjoy getting excellent food and drink; it will enjoy getting whatever is excellent by way of the five strands of sensuality. Why is that? Because one is practicing giving with sincerity. Householder, one should understand that one will receive these kinds of results.

Householder, if one gives what is excellent but gives without faith, gives without deliberation, gives but not with one’s own hands, gives without going in person, gives without due consideration, gives without sincerity, gives without contemplating the fruits and results of one’s actions, then one should contemplate receiving the following kinds of results: One’s mind will not enjoy getting an excellent house; it will not enjoy getting an excellent chariot; it will not enjoy getting excellent clothes; it will not enjoy getting excellent food and drink; it will not enjoy getting whatever is excellent by way of the five strands of sensuality. Why is that? Because one is practicing giving without sincerity. Householder, one should understand that one will receive these kinds of results. Householder, if one gives what is excellent and gives with faith, gives with deliberation, gives with one’s own hands, gives having gone in person, gives with due consideration, gives with sincerity, gives having contemplated the fruits and results of one’s actions, then one should contemplate receiving the following kinds of results: One’s mind will enjoy getting an excellent house; it will enjoy getting an excellent chariot; it will enjoy getting excellent clothes; it will enjoy getting excellent food and drink; it will enjoy getting whatever is excellent by way of the five strands of sensuality. Why is that? Because one is practicing giving with sincerity. Householder, one should understand that one will receive these kinds of results.^249 Householder, in the distant past there was a great brahmin householder named Velāma. He was extremely wealthy and prosperous, with immeas urable wealth, with many domains and feudatories, all manner of treasures, and livestock beyond reckoning. He practiced giving in the following ways: With eighty-four thousand golden bowls filled with pieces of silver, in this way he practiced a great giving; with eighty-four thousand silver bowls filled with pieces of gold, in this way he practiced a great giving; with eighty-four thousand golden bowls filled with pieces of gold, in this way he practiced a great giving; with eighty-four thousand silver bowls filled with pieces of silver, in this way he practiced a great giving; [W]ith eighty-four thousand elephants solemnly adorned and decorated with a covering of white netting, in this way he practiced a great giving; with eighty-four thousand horses solemnly adorned and decorated with white net ting and golden ornaments, in this way he practiced a great giving;

[W]ith eighty-four thousand cows clothed in cords and coverlets, each of which, when milked, was able to yield a barrelful of milk, in this way he practiced a great giving; with eighty-four thousand women who were of dignified beauty that delighted those who saw them, adorned with various precious necklaces for dignified decoration, in this way he practiced a great giving—not to mention food and beverages to be consumed as well.^250 Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma would it be if one were to feed all the worldlings in Jambudīpa.^251 Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma and the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa would it be if one were to feed one stream-enterer. Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, to the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa and the feeding of a hun- dred stream-enterers would it be if one were to feed one once-returner. Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, to the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa, to the feeding of a hun- dred stream-enterers and a hundred once-returners would it be if one were to feed one nonreturner. Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, to the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa, to the feeding of a hun- dred stream-enterers, a hundred once-returners, and a hundred nonreturners would it be if one were to feed one arahant. Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, to the feeding all the worldlings in Jambudīpa, to the feeding of a hundred stream-enterers, a hundred once-returners, a hundred nonreturners, and a hundred arahants would it be if one were to feed one _paccekabuddha._ Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, to the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa, to the feeding of a hun- dred stream-enterers, a hundred once-returners, a hundred nonreturners, a hundred arahants, and a hundred _paccekabuddha_ s, would it be if one were to feed one tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened. Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, and to the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa, to the feeding of a hundred stream-enterers, a hundred once-returners, a hundred nonreturners, a hundred arahants, and a hundred _paccekabuddha_ s, would be if one were

to construct a monastery and give it to the Sangha of bhikkhus of the four directions.^252 Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, to the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa, to the feeding of a hun dred stream-enterers, a hundred once-returners, a hundred nonreturners, a hundred arahants, a hundred paccekabuddha s, and to constructing a monastery and giving it to the Sangha of bhikkhus of the four directions, would it be if one were to take refuge joyfully in the Triple Gem—the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of bhikkhus—and to take the precepts. Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, to the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa, to the feeding of a hundred stream-enterers, a hundred once-returners, a hundred nonreturners, a hundred arahants, a hundred paccekabuddha s, to constructing a monastery and giving it to the Sangha of bhikkhus of the four directions, and to taking refuge joyfully in the Triple Gem—the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of bhikkhus— and taking the precepts, would it be if one were to develop a mind of lov ing-kindness for all beings just for the brief time it takes to milk a cow. Householder, superior even to this great giving by the brahmin Velāma, to the feeding of all the worldlings in Jambudīpa, to the feeding of a hun dred stream-enterers, a hundred once-returners, a hundred nonreturners, a hundred arahants, a hundred paccekabuddha s, to constructing a monastery and giving it to the Sangha of bhikkhus of the four directions, to taking refuge joyfully in the Triple Gem—the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of bhikkhus—and taking the precepts, and to developing a mind of loving-kindness for all beings just for the brief time that it takes to milk a cow, would it be if one were to contemplate all phenomena as imper manent, dukkha, empty, and devoid of self.^253 Householder, what do you think? The great brahmin householder of the past named Velāma, was he someone else? Do not think that. Why is that? You should know that he was myself.^254 In the past I was the great brahmin householder named Velāma. Householder, at that time I was benefiting myself and benefiting others, benefiting many people. I had compassion for the whole world, and I sought prosperity, benefit, peace, and happiness for deva s and human beings. The teaching I gave at that time did not lead to the ultimate, was

not the ultimate purity, not the ultimate holy life, not the ultimate com- pletion of the holy life. At that time I had not become free of birth, old age, disease, and death, sorrow, and grief, sadness and lamentation, nor was I able to attain complete liberation from _dukkha._ Householder, I have now appeared in this world as a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one. I now benefit myself, benefit others, benefit many people. I have compassion for the whole world, and I seek prosperity, benefit, peace, and happiness for _deva_ s and human beings. The teaching I give now does lead to the ultimate, is the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life. I have become free of birth, old age, disease, and death, sorrow and grief, sadness and lamentation. I have attained complete liberation from _dukkha._ Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the householder Sudatta and the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma155-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA27.3]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN7.20]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA155]]
> ◄  [[ma154-bdk]] 📜  [[ma156-bdk]] ►
