---
sutta_code: "MA165"
sutta_title:
  - "溫泉林天 "
  - "Deva at the Hot Spring Grove"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA165]]
> ◄  [[ma164-bdk]] 📜  [[ma166-bdk]] ►

### 165. The Discourse on a Deva at the Hot Spring Grove

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Rājagaha, staying in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.

At that time the venerable Samiddhi was also dwelling at Rājagaha, staying in the Hot Spring Grove. When the night was over, toward dawn, the venerable Samiddhi left his dwelling and approached the hot spring. Taking off his robes and [leaving] them on the bank, he entered the hot spring to bathe. Having bathed, he came out again, wiped his body [dry], and put on his robes. Then, the night being over, toward dawn, a _deva_ of fine physique and majestic appearance approached the venerable Samiddhi, paid homage with the head, stepped back, and stood to one side. The excellent splendor of that _deva_ ’s appearance brilliantly illuminated the bank of the hot spring. Having stepped back and stood to one side, that _deva_ said to the venerable Samiddhi, “Monk, do you remember the verses on an auspicious night?”^347 The venerable Samiddhi replied to that _deva,_ “I do not remember the verses on an auspicious night.” He [then] asked the _deva,_ “Do you remember the verses on an auspicious night?” The _deva_ replied, “I too do not remember the verses on an auspicious night.” The venerable Samiddhi asked the _deva_ further, “Who does remember the verses on an auspicious night?”^348 The _deva_ answered: The World-honored One is dwelling here at Rājagaha, staying in the Bam- boo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. He will remember the verses on an auspicious night. Monk, approach the World-honored One and from him memorize well the verses on an auspicious night and recite them. Why is that? [Because] the verses on an auspicious night pertain to the Teaching; they pertain to what is beneficial. They are the root of the holy life, leading to knowledge, to realization, and to nirvana. [As] a son of good family who, out of faith, has left the household life to become homeless and practice the path [you] should memorize well the verses on an auspicious night and recite them. Having spoken in this way, that _deva_ paid homage with the head at the feet of the venerable Samiddhi and, having circumambulated him three times, vanished on the spot. Then, not long after the _deva_ had vanished, the venerable Samiddhi approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with his head, he stepped back, sat to one side, and said:

World-honored One, today, when the night was over, toward dawn, I left my dwelling and approached the hot spring. I took off my robes and, [leaving] them on the bank, entered the hot spring to bathe. Having bathed, I came out and stood on the bank wiping my body [dry]. At that time, the night being over, toward dawn, a deva of fine physique and majestic appearance approached me, paid homage with the head, stepped back, and stood to one side. The excellent splendor of that deva ’s appearance brilliantly illuminated the bank of the hot spring. Having stepped back and stood to one side, that deva said to me, “Monk, do you remember the verses on an auspicious night?” I replied to that deva, “I do not remember the verses on an auspicious night.” [Then] I asked the deva, “Do you remember the verses on an aus picious night?” The deva replied, “I too do not remember the verses on an auspicious night.” I asked [the deva ] further, “Who does remember the verses on an aus picious night?” The deva answered, “The World-honored One is dwelling here at Rāja gaha, staying in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. He will remember the verses on an auspicious night. “Monk, approach the World-honored One and from him memorize well the verses on an auspicious night and recite them. Why is that? [Because] the verses on an auspicious night pertain to the Teaching; they pertain to what is beneficial. They are the root of the holy life, leading to knowledge, to realization, and to nirvana. “[As] a son of good family who, out of faith, has left the household life to become homeless and practice the path, [you] should memorize well the verses on an auspicious night and recite them.” Having spoken in this way, that deva paid homage with the head at my feet and, having circumambulated me three times, vanished on the spot. The World-honored One asked, “Samiddhi, do you know that deva ’s name and where he came from?” The venerable Samiddhi replied, “World-honored One, I do not know that deva ’s name and I also do not know where he came from.”

The World-honored One said, “Samiddhi, that _deva_ is called Main Hall and he is a general in the army of the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three.”^349 Then the venerable Samiddhi said: World-honored One, now is the right time. Well-gone One, now is the right time for the World-honored One to teach the bhikkhus the verses on an auspicious night. Having heard them from the World-honored One, the bhikkhus will remember them well. The World-honored One said, “Samiddhi, listen closely. Listen closely and pay proper attention to what I shall teach you.” The venerable Samiddhi said, “Yes, indeed.” Then all the bhikkhus listened to receive instruction. The Buddha said: Be careful not to think about the past, And do not long for the future. Matters of the past have already ceased, And the future has not yet arrived. Phenomena in the present Are what one should contemplate,^350 Mindful of [their] lack of stability. The wise awaken in this way. Undertaking [such] practice of noble ones, Who need worry about death? “I shall disengage from that, [This] great suffering and misery shall end!” Practice diligently like this, Day and night without negligence! Therefore, one should regularly teach The verses on an auspicious night. Having spoken in this way, the Buddha rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation. Then the bhikkhus had this thought: “Venerable friends, you should know that the World-honored One has risen from his seat and entered his dwelling

to sit in meditation, having given this instruction in brief, without explaining its details, [namely]: “Be careful not to think about the past, And do not long for the future. Matters of the past have already ceased, And the future has not yet arrived. “Phenomena in the present Are what one should contemplate, Mindful of [their] lack of stability. The wise awaken in this way. “Undertaking [such] practice of noble ones, Who need worry about death? ‘I shall disengage from that, [This] great suffering and misery shall end!’ “Practice diligently like this, Day and night without negligence! Therefore, one should regularly teach The verses on an auspicious night.” They further had this thought: “Venerable friends, who would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief?” They further had this thought: “The venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World-honored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Mahākaccāna would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief. “Venerable friends, let us together approach the venerable Mahākaccāna and request him to explain its meaning. As the venerable Mahākaccāna explains it, we shall remember it well.” Then the bhikkhus approached the venerable Mahākaccāna. Having exchanged greetings with him, they stepped back, sat to one side, and said: Venerable Mahākaccāna, please know this. The World-honored One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, after giving this instruction in brief, without explaining its details, [namely:]

Be careful not to think about the past, And do not long for the future. Matters of the past have already ceased, And the future has not yet arrived.

Phenomena in the present Are what one should contemplate, Mindful of [their] lack of stability. The wise awaken in this way.

Undertaking [such] practice of noble ones,^351 Who need worry about death? “I shall disengage from that, [This] great suffering and misery shall end!”

Practice diligently like this, Day and night without negligence! Therefore, one should regularly teach The verses on an auspicious night.

Then we had this thought: “Venerable friends, who would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief?” We further had this thought: “The venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World-honored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Mahākaccāna would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief.” May the venerable Mahākaccāna give [us] a detailed explanation, out of compassion!

The venerable Mahākaccāna said:

Venerable friends, listen while I tell you a simile. On hearing a simile wise people understand the meaning. Venerable friends, it is just as if there were a man wishing to search for heartwood. In order to search for heartwood, [he] enters the forest, carrying an ax. He sees a great tree possessed of roots, branches, joints, twigs, leaves, flowers, and heartwood. That man does not take hold of the roots, branches, joints, and heartwood, but only takes hold of the twigs and leaves.

Venerable friends, what you have said is just like that. The World-hon ored One was present, yet you left him to come and ask me about this matter. Why is that? Venerable friends, know this: the World-honored One is the eye, is knowledge, is meaning, is the Dharma, is the master of the Dharma, is the general of the Dharma. The teaching of the true meaning, the revelation of all meaning, comes from the World-honored One. Venerable friends, you should have approached the World-honored One to ask him about this matter, [saying,] “World-honored One, how is this? What is the meaning of this?” As the World-honored One explained it, venerable friends, so you should have remembered it well. Then the bhikkhus said: Yes, indeed, venerable Mahākaccāna. The World-honored One is the eye, is knowledge, is meaning, is the Dharma, is the master of the Dharma, is the general of the Dharma. The teaching of the true meaning, the revelation of all meaning, comes from the World-honored One. We should have approached the World-honored One to ask about this matter, saying, “World-honored One, how is this? What is its meaning?” As the World-honored One explained it, so we should have remembered it well. However, the venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World honored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Mahākaccāna will be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One said in brief. May the venerable Mahākaccāna explain it in detail, out of compassion! The venerable Mahākaccāna said to the bhikkhus: Venerable friends, listen together to what I shall say. Venerable friends, how does a monk think about the past? Venerable friends, with the really existing eye a monk comes to know forms,^352 which are agreeable, forms that the mind [then] recalls, forms that are yearned for, that are associated with desire, that the mind delights in, that [become] a source of grasping, a source that is in the past.

His consciousness of the past is defiled with desire. Because his con- sciousness is defiled with desire, he delights in those [forms]. Because he delights in them, he thinks about the past. In the same way with the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... with the really existing mind a monk comes to know mind objects, which are agreeable, mind objects that the mind [then] recalls, mind objects that are yearned for, that are associated with desire, that the mind delights in, that [become] a source of grasping, a source that is in the past. His consciousness of the past is defiled with desire. Because his consciousness is defiled with desire, he delights in those [mind objects]. Because he delights in them, he thinks about the past. Venerable friends, this is how a monk thinks about the past. Venerable friends, how does a monk not think about the past? Venerable friends, with the really existing eye a monk comes to know forms, which are agreeable, forms that the mind [then] recalls, forms that are yearned for, that are associated with desire, that the mind delights in, that [become] a source of grasping, a source that is in the past. His consciousness of the past is not defiled with desire. Because his consciousness is not defiled with desire, he does not delight in those [forms]. Because he does not delight in them, he does not think about the past. In the same way with the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... with the really existing mind a monk comes to know mind objects, which are agreeable, mind objects that the mind [then] recalls, mind objects that are yearned for, that are associated with desire, that the mind delights in, that [become] a source of grasping, a source that is in the past. His con- sciousness of the past is not defiled with desire. Because his consciousness is not defiled with desire, he does not delight in those [mind objects]. Because he does not delight in them, he does not think about the past. Ven- erable friends, this is how a monk does not think about the past. Venerable friends, how does a monk long for the future? Venerable friends, if there are the eye, forms, and eye consciousness of the future, and a monk wishes to obtain what has not yet been obtained, [or] his mind longs for [more of] what has already been obtained, [then] because his mind already has this longing, he delights in those [forms]. Because he delights in them, he longs for the future.

In the same way with the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... if there are the mind, mind objects, and mind consciousness of the future, and a monk wishes to obtain what has not yet been obtained, [or] his mind longs for [more of] what has already been obtained, [then] because his mind already has this longing, he delights in those [mind objects]. Because he delights in them, he longs for the future. Venerable friends, this is how a monk longs for the future. Venerable friends, how does a monk not long for the future? Venerable friends, if there are the eye, forms, and eye consciousness of the future, and a monk does not wish to obtain what has not yet been obtained, and his mind does not long for [more of] what has already been obtained, [then] because his mind does not already have this longing, he does not delight in those [forms]. Because he does not delight in them, he does not long for the future. In the same way with the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... if there are the mind, mind objects, and mind consciousness of the future, and a monk does not wish to obtain what has not yet been obtained, and his mind does not long for [more of] what has already been obtained, [then] because his mind does not have this longing, he does not delight in those [mind objects]. Because he does not delight in them, he does not long for the future. Venerable friends, this is how a monk does not long for the future. Venerable friends, how does a monk cling to phenomena in the present? Venerable friends, if there are the eye, forms, and eye consciousness of the present, and a monk’s consciousness of the present is defiled with desire, [then] because his consciousness is defiled with desire, he delights in those [forms]. Because he delights in them, he clings to phenomena in the present. In the same way with the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... If there are the mind, mind objects, and mind consciousness of the present, and a monk’s consciousness of the present is defiled with desire, [then] because his consciousness is defiled with desire, he delights in those [mind objects]. Because he delights in them, he clings to phe nomena in the present. Venerable friends, this is how a monk clings to phenomena in the present.

Venerable friends, how does a monk not cling to phenomena in the present? Venerable friends, if there are the eye, forms, and eye conscious- ness of the present, and a monk’s consciousness of the present is not defiled with desire, [then] because his consciousness is not defiled with desire, he does not delight in those [forms]. Because he does not delight in them, he does not cling to phenomena in the present. In the same way with the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... if there are the mind, mind objects, and mind consciousness of the present, and a monk’s consciousness of the present is not defiled with desire, [then] because his consciousness is not defiled with desire, he does not delight in those [mind objects]. Because he does not delight in them, he does not cling to phenomena in the present. Venerable friends, this is how a monk does not cling to phenomena in the present. Venerable friends, the World-honored One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, after giving this instruction in brief without explaining the details, [namely:]

Be careful not to think about the past, And do not long for the future. Matters of the past have already ceased, And the future has not yet arrived. Phenomena in the present Are what one should contemplate, Mindful of [their] lack of stability. The wise awaken in this way. Undertaking [such] practice of noble ones, Who need worry about death? “I shall disengage from that, [This] great suffering and misery shall end!” Practice diligently like this, Day and night without negligence! Therefore, one should regularly teach The verses on an auspicious night.

This brief instruction that the World-honored One gave without explaining its details I have explained in detail in this way, employing these phrases and words. Venerable friends, approach the Buddha and set out [my expla nation] in full [to him]. As the World-honored One explains its meaning, venerable friends, you can together remember it. Then, having heard the venerable Mahākaccāna’s explanation, the bhikkhus, having well memorized [how] to recite it, rose from their seats, circumambulated the venerable Mahākaccāna three times, and left. Approaching the Buddha, they paid homage with their heads, stepped back, sat to one side, and said: World-honored One, the instruction that the World-honored One gave in brief without analyzing the meaning in detail, after which he rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, the venerable Mahākaccāna has explained in detail employing these phrases and words. Having heard it, the World-honored One expressed praise: It is well, it is well, my disciple is endowed with the eye, with knowledge, with meaning, with Dharma. Why is that? [Because] in regard to this instruction, which the teacher taught to the disciples in brief, without explaining its details, that disciple has explained it in detail employing these phrases and words. You should remember it [just] as the monk Mahākaccāna has explained it. Why is that? [Because] his explanation is [just] how you should contemplate the meaning.^353 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, those bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma165-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.71]], [[MA105]], [[AN2.36:2.1]], [[DN2]], [[SN47.46]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN]], [[MA164]], [[MA165]], [[MA166]], [[MA167]], [[MN131]], [[MN132]], [[MN133]], [[MN134]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA165]]
> ◄  [[ma164-bdk]] 📜  [[ma166-bdk]] ►
