---
sutta_code: "MA166"
sutta_title:
  - "釋中禪室尊 "
  - "Venerable One in a Meditation Hut among the Sakyans"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA166]]
> ◄  [[ma165-bdk]] 📜  [[ma167-bdk]] ►

### 166. The Discourse on a Venerable One in a Meditation Hut among the Sakyans

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, staying in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya was dwelling among the Sakyans in a meditation hut in a forest. Then, the night being over, toward dawn, the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya came out of his meditation hut, spread

his sitting mat on a rope bed that was on open ground in the shade of the meditation hut, and sat down [on it] cross-legged. Then, the night being over, toward dawn, a _deva_ of fine physique and majestic appearance approached the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya. He paid hom- age with the head, stepped back, and stood to one side. The excellent splendor of that _deva_ brilliantly illuminated the whole meditation hut. Standing there on one side, the _deva_ addressed the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya, “Monk, do you remember the verses on an auspicious night and their meaning?”^355 The venerable Lomasakaṅgiya replied to the _deva,_ “I do not remember the verses on an auspicious night nor do I remember their meaning.” He [then] asked the _deva,_ “Do you remember the verses on an auspicious night and their meaning?” That _deva_ replied, “I remember the verses on an auspicious night but not their meaning.” The venerable Lomasakaṅgiya asked the _deva_ further, “How is it that you remember the verses on an auspicious night but not their meaning?” The _deva_ replied: At one time the World-honored One was dwelling at Rājagaha, staying in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.^356 At that time the World- honored One taught the bhikkhus the verses on an auspicious night [thus]: Be careful not to think about the past, And do not long for the future. Matters of the past have already ceased, And the future has not yet arrived. Phenomena in the present Are what one should contemplate,^357 Mindful of [their] lack of stability. The wise awaken in this way. Undertaking [such] practice of noble ones, Who need worry about death? “I shall disengage from that, [This] great suffering and misery shall end!”

Practice diligently like this, Day and night without negligence! Therefore, one should regularly teach The verses on an auspicious night. Monk, in this way I remember the verses on an auspicious night, but not their meaning. The venerable Lomasakaṅgiya asked the deva further, “Who remembers the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning?”^358 The deva answered: The World-honored One is dwelling at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anātha piṇḍika’s Park. He will remember the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning. Monk, approach the World-honored One and from him memorize well the verses on an auspicious night and also their mean ing, and recite them. Why is that? [Because] the verses on an auspicious night and their meaning pertain to the Teaching; they pertain to what is beneficial. Being the root of the holy life, they lead to knowledge, to realization, and to nirvana. [As] a son of good family who, out of faith, has left the household life to become homeless and practice the path, [you] should memorize well the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning, and recite them. Having spoken like this, that deva paid homage with the head at the feet of the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya and, having circumambulated him three times, vanished on the spot. Then, not long after the deva had vanished, the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya, having completed the rains retreat among the Sakyans,^359 the three months being over, having mended his robes, took his robes and bowl and headed for Sāvatthī. Traveling by stages he reached Sāvatthī, where he stayed at Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with his head, he stepped back, sat to one side, and said: Blessed One, at one time I was dwelling among the Sakyans, in a medi tation hut in a forest. Blessed One, then, the night being over, toward

dawn, I came out of a meditation hut, spread my sitting mat on a rope bed that was on open ground in the shade of the meditation hut, and sat down on it cross-legged. Then, the night being over, toward dawn, a _deva_ of fine physique and majestic appearance approached me. He paid homage with the head, stepped back, and sat to one side. The excellent splendor of that _deva_ ’s appearance brilliantly illuminated the whole meditation hut. Standing there on one side, the _deva_ addressed me, “Monk, do you remember the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning?” I replied to that _deva,_ “I do not remember the verses on an auspicious night, nor do I remember their meaning.” I [then] asked the _deva,_ “Do you remember the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning?” The _deva_ replied, “I remember the verses on an auspicious night but not their meaning.” I asked the _deva_ further: “How is it that you remember the verses on an auspicious night but not their meaning?” The _deva_ replied to me, “At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Rāja- gaha, staying in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time the World-honored One taught the bhikkhus the verses on an auspicious night [thus]:

Be careful not to think about the past, And do not long for the future. Matters of the past have already ceased, And the future has not yet arrived. Phenomena in the present Are what one should contemplate, Mindful of [their] lack of stability. The wise awaken in this way. Undertaking [such] practice of noble ones, Who need worry about death? “I shall disengage from that, [This] great suffering and misery shall end!” Practice diligently like this, Day and night without negligence!

Therefore, one should regularly teach The verses on an auspicious night. Monk, in this way I remember the verses on an auspicious night, but not their meaning.” I asked the _deva_ further, “Who remembers the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning?” The _deva_ replied to me, “The Buddha is dwelling at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. He will remember the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning. Monk, approach the World-honored One and from him memorize well the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning, and recite them. Why is that? “[Because] the verses on an auspicious night and their meaning pertain to the Teaching; they pertain to what is beneficial. Being the root of the holy life, they lead to knowledge, to realization, and to nirvana. [As] a son of good family who, out of faith, has left the household life to become homeless and practice the path, [you] should memorize well the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning, and recite them.” So saying, that _deva_ paid homage with the head at my feet and, having circumambulated me three times, vanished on the spot. Then the World-honored One asked the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya, “Do you know that _deva_ ’s name and where it came from?” The venerable Lomasakaṅgiya replied, “World-honored One, I do not know that _deva_ ’s name, nor do I know where it came from.” The World-honored One said, “Kaṅgiya, that _deva_ is called Candana, who is a general in the army of the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three.” Then the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya said: World-honored One, now is the right time. Well-gone One, now is the right time for the World-honored One to teach the bhikkhus the verses on an auspicious night and also their meaning. Having heard them from the World-honored One, the bhikkhus will remember them well. The World-honored One said, “Kaṅgiya, listen closely and pay proper attention. I shall teach you the meaning in detail.”

The venerable Lomasakaṅgiya said, “Yes, indeed. We shall listen and receive the teaching.” The Buddha spoke [thus]: Be careful not to think about the past, And do not long for the future. Matters of the past have already ceased, And the future has not yet arrived. Phenomena in the present Are what one should contemplate, Mindful of [their] lack of stability. The wise awaken in this way. Undertaking [such] practice of noble ones, Who need worry about death? “I shall disengage from that, [This] great suffering and misery shall end!” Practice diligently like this, Day and night without negligence! Therefore, one should regularly teach The verses on an auspicious night. Kaṅgiya, how does a monk think about the past? If a monk delights in form of the past, has desire for it, is attached to it, is established in it; if he delights in feeling... in perception... in formations... in conscious- ness of the past, has desire for it, is attached to it, is established in it— this is how a monk thinks about the past. Kaṅgiya, how does a monk not think about the past? If a monk does not delight in form of the past, has no desire for it, is not attached to it, is not established in it; if he does not delight in feeling... in perception... in formations... in consciousness of the past, has no desire for it, is not attached to it, is not established in it—this is how a monk does not think about the past. Kaṅgiya, how does a monk long for the future? If a monk delights in form of the future, has desire for it, is attached to it, is established in it;

if he delights in feeling... in perception... in formations... in con sciousness of the future, has desire for it, is attached to it, is established in it—this is how a monk longs for the future. Kaṅgiya, how does a monk not long for the future? If a monk does not delight in form of the future, does not desire it, is not attached to it, is not estab lished in it; if he does not delight in feeling... in perception... in formations

... in consciousness of the future, does not desire it, is not attached to it, is not established in it—this is how a monk does not long for the future. Kaṅgiya, how does a monk cling to phenomena in the present? If a monk delights in form of the present, has desire for it, is attached to it, is established in it; if he delights in feeling... in perception... in formations... in con- sciousness of the present, has desire for it, is attached to it, is established in it—this is how a monk clings to phenomena in the present.^360 Kaṅgiya how does a monk not cling to phenomena in the present? If a monk does not delight in form of the present, has no desire for it, is not attached to it, is not established in it; if he does not delight in feeling... in perception... in formations... in consciousness of the present, has no desire for it, is not attached to it, is not established in it—this is how a monk does not cling to phenomena in the present. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Lomasakaṅgiya and the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma166-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN]], [[MA164]], [[MA165]], [[MA166]], [[MA167]], [[MN131]], [[MN132]], [[MN133]], [[MN134]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA166]]
> ◄  [[ma165-bdk]] 📜  [[ma167-bdk]] ►
