---
sutta_code: "MA170"
sutta_title:
  - "鸚鵡 "
  - "To [a Brahmin Named] Parrot"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA170]]
> ◄  [[ma169-bdk]] 📜  [[ma171-bdk]] ►

### 170. The Discourse to [a Brahmin Named] Parrot

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time, when the night was over, toward dawn, the World-honored One put on his [outer] robe, took his bowl, and entered Sāvatthī to beg for almsfood.^377 While begging for almsfood, he approached the house of the young brahmin [named] Parrot, the son of Todeyya. At this time the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, had gone out for some small matter and was not at home. At that time in the house of the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, there was a white dog, which was on a large bed eating from a golden feeding bowl. Then the white dog saw the Buddha coming in the distance. Having seen him, it barked. The World-honored One said to the white dog, “You should not do that. You have gone from defaming [people in your previous existence] to barking [at them in this existence].” On hearing this, the white dog became extremely angry, got down from the bed, went to a woodheap, and lay down beside it sad and distressed.

Later, on returning to the house, the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, saw that the white dog had become extremely angry and had gotten down from the bed, had gone to the woodheap, and was lying beside it sad and distressed. He asked the people in the house:

Who has harassed my dog, so that he has become extremely angry, has gotten down from the bed, and has gone to the woodheap, and is lying beside it sad and distressed? The people of the house replied: None of us has harassed the white dog, so that he has become very angry, has gotten down from the bed, has gone to the woodheap, and is lying beside it sad and distressed. Young brahmin, you should know that the renunciant Gotama came here today to beg for almsfood. On seeing him, the white dog chased him and barked at him. The renunciant Gotama [then] said to the white dog, “You should not do that. You have gone from defaming [people in your previous existence] to barking [at them in this existence].” It is because of this, young brahmin, for this reason that the white dog became extremely angry, got down from the bed, went to the woodheap, and lay down beside it sad and distressed. On hearing this the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, became very angry, wanting to defame the World-honored One, wanting to slander the World- honored One, wanting to disparage the World-honored One. So, [in order] to defame, slander, and disparage the renunciant Gotama, he right away went out of Sāvatthī and approached Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One was teaching the Dharma, surrounded in front and behind by an immeasurably large assembly. Seeing the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, coming in the distance, the World-honored One said to the bhikkhus, “Do you see the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, coming?” They answered, “We see him.” The World-honored One said: If the life of the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, were to end now, he would certainly be reborn in hell just as quickly as one might bend one’s arm and stretch it out again. Why is that? Because he is extremely angry with me. Because of [such] a mind full of anger, at the breaking up

of the body at death a living being will certainly go to a bad realm of exis tence and be reborn in hell. Then the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, approached the Buddha and said to the World-honored One, “Renunciant Gotama, did you come to my house today to beg for almsfood?” The World-honored One replied, “I did go to your house today to beg for almsfood.” [The young brahmin asked:] Gotama, what did you say to my white dog, so that my white dog became extremely angry, got down from the bed, went to the woodheap, and lay down beside it sad and distressed? The World-honored One replied: Today, toward dawn, I put on my [outer] robe, took my bowl, and entered Sāvatthī to beg for almsfood. Proceeding [from house to house] in turn, I approached your house to beg for almsfood. Then the white dog saw me coming in the distance. Having seen me, he barked. I said to the white dog, “You should not do that. You have gone from defaming [people in your previous existence] to barking [at them in this existence].” Because of this, the white dog became extremely angry, got down from the bed, went to the woodheap, and lay down beside it sad and distressed. The young brahmin Parrot asked the World-honored One, “In its former existence, what [relationship] did the white dog have to me?” The World-honored One replied, “Stop, stop, young brahmin! Take care not to ask me this; for on hearing [the answer], you will certainly be displeased.” The young brahmin Parrot asked the World-honored One three times, “In its former existence, what [relationship] did the white dog have to me?” The World-honored One replied three times: “Stop, stop, young brahmin! Take care not to ask me this; for on hearing [the answer], you will certainly be displeased.” The World-honored One said to the young brahmin, “You asked me three times and would not stop. Young brahmin, you should know that in its former existence the white dog was your father, Todeyya.” On hearing this, the young brahmin Parrot became even more angry, wanting to defame the World-honored One, wanting to slander the World-honored One,

wanting to disparage the World-honored One. Thus [in order] to defame, slander, and disparage the renunciant Gotama, he said to the World-honored One:

My father Todeyya was a great donor; he performed great sacrifices. With the breaking up of the body at death he [should] rightly have been reborn in the Brahmā world. Through what cause, what condition, would he have been reborn in this lowly condition among dogs? The World-honored One said: Your father Todeyya was very conceited. This is the reason why he was reborn in a lowly condition among dogs. A brahmin who is very conceited After death will be reborn in [one of] six types of existence: As a chicken, a dog, a pig, or a jackal, A donkey as the fifth, or in hell as the sixth. Young brahmin Parrot, if you do not believe what I have said, return [home] and say to the white dog, “If in your former existence you were my father, white dog, then you should get back on the big bed.” Young brahmin, the white dog will certainly get back on the bed. [Then say,] “White dog, if in your former existence you were my father, then go back to eating from the golden feeding bowl.” Young brahmin, the white dog will certainly go back to eating from the golden feeding bowl. [Then say this,] “If in your former existence you were my father, show me the place, unknown to me, where you hid gold, silver, crystal, and jewelry.” Young brahmin, the white dog will certainly show you a place, unknown to you, where gold, silver, crystal, and jewelry are hidden. Then, on hearing what the Buddha said, the young brahmin Parrot mem- orized it well and recited it. Having circumambulated the World-honored One, he returned to his home. He said to the white dog, “If in your former existence you were my father, white dog, then you should get back on the big bed.” And the white dog promptly got back on the big bed. [Then he said,] “White dog, if in your former existence you were my father, then you should go back to eating from the golden feeding bowl.” And the white dog promptly went back to eating from the golden feeding bowl.

[Again, he said,] “If in your former existence you were my father, show me the place, unknown to me, where my father earlier hid gold, silver, crystal, and jewelry.” The white dog promptly got down from the bed and went to the place where, in his previous existence, he used to spend the night. With its muzzle and paws it began digging beneath the four feet of the bed. From that place, the young brahmin Parrot recovered a great treasure. Thereupon, having recovered the treasure, the young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, was extremely happy. He knelt with his right knee on the ground, extended his hands with joined palms in the direction of Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park, and three times expressed praise for the World-honored One aloud: “What the renunciant Gotama said was not false! What the renun ciant Gotama said was true! What the renunciant Gotama said was according to reality!” Having praised [the Buddha] three times, he went out of Sāvatthī and approached Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One was teaching the Dharma surrounded in front and behind by an immeasurably large assembly. Seeing the young brahmin Parrot coming in the distance, the World-honored One said to the bhikkhus, “Do you see the young brahmin Parrot coming?” They answered, “We see him.” The World-honored One said: If the life of the young brahmin Parrot were to end now, he would certainly go to a good realm of existence, just as quickly as one might bend one’s arm and stretch it out again. Why is that? Because he has an extremely wholesome mental attitude toward me. Because of [such] a wholesome state of mind, at the breaking up of the body at death living beings will certainly go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven. At that time the young brahmin Parrot approached the Buddha, exchanged friendly greetings, stepped back, and sat to one side. The World-honored One said, “How was it, young brahmin? Was it as I said regarding the white dog, or was it not so?” The young brahmin Parrot replied, “Gotama, it really was as you said. Gotama, I wish to ask something else. Will you listen if I venture to express it?” The World-honored One said, “Ask as you wish.”

Gotama, what is the cause, what is the condition why living beings that have received a human body are superior or inferior, excellent or not excellent? Why is that? Gotama, I see those who have a short life span and those who have a long life span. I see those who are often unwell and those who are seldom unwell. I see those who are ugly and those who are handsome. I see those who lack power and those who have power. I see those who are from lowly families and those who are from respected families. I see those who lack wealth and those who have wealth. I see those who have bad knowl- edge and those who have good knowledge. The World-honored One replied: Those living beings are [like this] because of the deeds that they themselves have done. The results obtained are caused by these deeds. Conditioned by [their own] deeds, dependent on [their own] deeds, having [their own] deeds as their abode, living beings are correspondingly superior or inferior, excellent or not excellent. The young brahmin Parrot said to the World-honored One: What the renunciant Gotama has said in brief, without analyzing it at length, I am unable to understand. May the renunciant Gotama explain it to me at length so that I get to understand the meaning. The World-honored One said, “Young brahmin, listen closely and pay proper attention. I will analyze it in detail for you.” The young brahmin Parrot said, “Yes, indeed. I shall listen and receive the teaching.” The Buddha said: Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to be of extremely short life span? Suppose that a man or a woman kills living beings, is wicked, bad, very evil, bloodthirsty, of harmful intent, attached to evil, devoid of mental states of kindness for living beings, even including insects.^378 One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the

body at death, certainly [either] go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will be of short life span.^379 Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive a short life span, namely: a man or woman kills living beings, is wicked, bad, very evil, bloodthirsty. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such results. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to be of long life span? Suppose that a man or a woman refrains from killing, abandons killing, discards sword and club, is endowed with a sense of shame and conscience, has mental states that are kind and compassionate, [wishing] to benefit all, even including insects. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will be of long life span. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive a long life span, namely: a man or a woman refrains from killing, abandons killing. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such results. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to be often unwell? Suppose that a man or a woman harasses living beings. He or she harasses living beings by [striking] them with the fists, or with sticks and stones, or with sword and club. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will often be unwell. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive many diseases, namely: a man or woman harasses living beings. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such results. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to be healthy? Suppose a man or a woman does not harass living beings. He or she does not harass living beings by [striking] them with the fists, or with sticks and stones, or with sword and club. One who has not undertaken or per formed such deeds will, at the breaking up of the body at death, certainly

[either] go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will be healthy. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive good health, namely: a man or woman does not harass living beings. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such results. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to be of ugly appearance? Suppose that a man or a woman has the nature of often becoming angry. On hearing some trifle, he or she becomes very angry, has ill will, shows dislike, is irritated, gives rise to sorrow, and generally gives rise to conflict and resentment. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will be of ugly appearance. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive an ugly appearance, namely: a man or a woman has the nature of often becoming angry. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such a result. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to be of handsome bodily appearance? Suppose that a man or a woman does not have the nature of often becom- ing angry. On hearing words, whether soft and tender or gross and crude, he or she does not become very angry or have ill will, does not show dislike or become irritated or sorrowful, does not often give rise to conflict and resentment. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will be of handsome bodily appearance. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive a handsome bodily appearance, namely: a man or a woman does not have the nature of often becoming angry. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such a result. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to lack power? Suppose that a man or a woman harbors envy in the heart. On seeing others get support and respect, he or she is given to envy. On seeing the

wealth of others, he or she wants to get it for himself or herself. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will lack power. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive no power, namely: a man or a woman harbors envy in the heart. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such a result. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to have great power? Suppose that a man or a woman does not harbor envy in the heart. On seeing others get support and respect, he or she is not given to envy. On seeing the wealth of others, he or she does not want to get it for himself or herself. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will have great power. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive power, namely: a man or woman does not harbor jealousy or envy [in the heart]. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such a result. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to be born into a lowly family? Suppose that a man or a woman is conceited and arrogant. He or she does not revere those who are worthy of reverence, does not esteem those who are worthy of esteem, does not appreciate those who are worthy of appreciation, does not respect those who are worthy of respect, does not support those who are worthy of support, does not give way to those who are worthy of being given way to, does not give a seat to those who are worthy of being given a seat, does not respectfully salute and greet those who are worthy of respectful salutation and greeting. One who has under taken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will be born into a lowly family.

Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive birth into a lowly family, namely: a man or a woman is conceited and arrogant. Young brah- min, you should know that these deeds have such a result. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to be born into a respected family? Suppose that a man or a woman is not conceited or arrogant. He or she reveres those who are worthy of reverence, esteems those who are worthy of esteem, appreciates those who are worthy of appreciation, respects those who are worthy of respect, supports those who are worthy of support, gives way to those who are worthy of being given way to, gives a seat to those who are worthy of being given a seat, respectfully salutes and greets those who are worthy of respectful salutation and greeting. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, at the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will be born into a respected family. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive birth into a respected family, namely: a man or woman is not conceited or arrogant. Young brah- min, you should know that these deeds have such results. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to lack wealth? Suppose that a man or a woman is not a donor, does not give gifts. He or she does not give to renunciants and brahmins, to the poor and destitute, to those who come from afar to beg [such things as] food and drink, clothes and blankets, flower garlands, fragrant unguents, shelter, beds and bedding, lamps, and servants. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will lack wealth. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive no wealth, namely: a man or a woman is not a donor, does not give gifts. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such results. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to have much wealth?

Suppose that a man or a woman is a donor, one who gives gifts. He or she gives to renunciants and brahmins, to the poor and destitute, to those who come from afar to beg [such things as] food and drink, clothes and blankets, flower garlands, fragrant unguents, shelter, beds and bedding, lamps, and servants. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will have much wealth. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive much wealth, namely: a man or woman is a donor, one who gives gifts. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such results. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to have bad knowledge? Suppose that a man or a woman does not frequently approach others to ask questions. He or she does not approach well-known and virtuous renunciants and brahmins at the proper time to inquire about what is ben eficial, [saying,] “Venerable sir, what is wholesome, what is unwholesome? What is an offense, what is not an offense? What is excellent, what is not excellent? What is white, what is black? Whence do white and black arise? What is beneficial and yields fruit in the present world, what is beneficial and yields fruit in the next world?”; and even supposing they do ask, they do not act [accordingly]. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will have bad knowledge. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive bad knowledge, namely: a man or woman does not frequently approach others to ask questions. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such a result. Young brahmin, what is the cause, what is the condition for a man or a woman to have good knowledge? Suppose that a man or a woman is able to approach others frequently to ask questions, that he or she often approaches well-known and virtuous renunciants and brahmins at the proper time to inquire about what is ben eficial, [saying,] “Venerable sir, what is wholesome, what is unwholesome? What is an offense, what is not an offense? What is excellent, what is not

excellent? What is white, what is black? Whence do white and black arise? What is beneficial and yields fruit in the present world, what is beneficial and yields fruit in the next world?” And having asked, they are able to act [accordingly]. One who has undertaken and performed such deeds will, on the breaking up of the body at death, certainly [either] go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven, [or else] on being reborn among human beings, he or she will have good knowledge. Why is that? [Because] this is the way to receive good knowledge, namely: a man or a woman frequently approaches others to ask questions. Young brahmin, you should know that these deeds have such a result. Young brahmin, you should know that performing deeds associated with a short life span will certainly lead to a short life span. Performing deeds associated with a long life span will certainly lead to a long life span. Performing deeds associated with often being unwell will certainly lead to often being unwell. Performing deeds associated with seldom being unwell will certainly lead to seldom being unwell. Performing deeds associated with being ugly will certainly lead to being ugly. Performing deeds associated with being handsome will certainly lead to being handsome. Performing deeds associated with lacking power will certainly lead to lacking power. Performing deeds associated with having power will cer- tainly lead to having power. Performing deeds associated with a lowly family will certainly lead to a lowly family. Performing deeds associated with a respected family will certainly lead to a respected family. Performing deeds associated with lacking wealth will certainly lead to lacking wealth. Performing deeds associated with much wealth will certainly lead to having much wealth. Performing deeds associated with bad knowledge will certainly lead to having bad knowledge. Performing deeds associated with good knowl- edge will certainly lead to having good knowledge. Young brahmin, this is [the implication of] what I said earlier, “Living beings are [like this] because of the deeds that they themselves have done. The results obtained are caused by these deeds. Conditioned by [their own] deeds, dependent on [their own] deeds, having [their own] deeds as

their abode, living beings are correspondingly superior or inferior, excellent or not excellent. The young brahmin Parrot, Todeyya’s son, said: World-honored One, I have understood. Well-gone One, I have come to know it. World-honored One, from now on I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of bhikkhus. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until the end of life, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life.^380 May the World-honored One from this day forth [please] approach the Todeyya household [for alms], just as he approaches the households of [other] lay disciples in Sāvatthī, so that the Todeyya household may obtain benefit for a long time, so that it may obtain welfare, peace, and happiness.^381 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the young brahmin [named] Parrot, Todeyya’s son, and the immeasurably [large] assem bly were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma170-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA152]] |  |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN5.199]], [[AN8.40]], [[MA171]], [[MN136]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA170]]
> ◄  [[ma169-bdk]] 📜  [[ma171-bdk]] ►
