---
sutta_code: "MA18"
sutta_title:
  - "天 "
  - "Devas"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA18]]
> ◄  [[ma17-bdk]] 📜  [[ma19-bdk]] ►

### 18. The Discourse to Sīha

Thus have I heard: At one time, the Buddha was staying at Vesālī, in the Gabled Hall near the Monkey Lake. At that time, many Licchavis from Vesālī had come together in the assem- bly hall, frequently speaking in praise of the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of bhikkhus. At that time, Senior Minister Sīha, a disciple of the Nigaṇṭhas, was also in the assembly. Then Senior Minister Sīha had the wish to visit the Buddha and pay homage to him. Senior Minister Sīha went first to the place of the Nigaṇṭhas, and told the Nigaṇṭhas: “Venerable sirs, I wish to go and visit the renunciant Gotama.” Then, the Nigaṇṭhas reprimanded Sīha, saying: You should not wish to visit the renunciant Gotama! Why? The renun- ciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on inaction, and he proclaims to people a teaching of inaction. Sīha, to visit [someone who asserts] a doctrine of inaction is inauspicious, and it is also inauspicious to pay homage [to him]. Those many Licchavis from Vesālī came together again in the assembly hall a second and a third time, frequently speaking in praise of the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of bhikkhus; and a second and a third time Senior Minister Sīha, a disciple of the Nigaṇṭhas, was in the assembly. Then, a second and a third time, Senior Minister Sīha had the wish to visit the Buddha and pay homage to him. [On the third occasion] Senior Minister Sīha, without asking leave of the Nigaṇṭhas, approached the Buddha. Having exchanged greetings, he sat down to one side and said:

I have heard thus: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on inac tion, and he proclaims to people a teaching of inaction.” Gotama, if someone speaks thus: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on inaction, and he proclaims to people a teaching of inaction,” is that person not misrepresenting the renunciant Gotama? Does he speak what is true? Does he speak what is Dharma? Does he speak the Dharma according to the Dharma? Does he not fall into error and incur censure according to the Dharma? The World-honored One replied: Sīha, if someone speaks thus: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on inaction, and he proclaims to people a teaching of inaction,” he does not misrepresent the renunciant Gotama, he speaks what is true, he speaks what is Dharma, he speaks the Dharma according to the Dharma, and he does not fall into error or incur censure according to the Dharma. Why is that? Sīha, there is a way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on inaction, and he proclaims to people a teaching of inaction.” Again, Sīha, there is another way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on action, and he proclaims to people a doctrine of action.” Again, Sīha, there is another way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on annihilation, and he proclaims to people a teaching of annihilation.” Again, Sīha, there is another way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on abhorrence, and he proclaims to people a teaching of abhorrence.” Again, Sīha, there is another way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on Dharma and Vinaya, and he proclaims to people a teaching of Dharma and Vinaya.”

Again, Sīha, there is another way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying] “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on asceticism, and he proclaims to people a teaching of asceticism.” Again, Sīha, there is another way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying] “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on not entering a womb [to be reborn], and he proclaims to people a teaching of not entering a womb.” Again, Sīha, there is another way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on attaining peace, and he proclaims to people a teaching of attaining peace.” Sīha, what is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doc- trine is based on inaction, and he proclaims to people a teaching of inaction”? Sīha, I proclaim that evil bodily actions are not to be done, that evil verbal and mental actions are not to be done. Sīha, the countless unwholesome and defiled states of this kind, which are the basis of future existence, which result in suffering and vexation and are the cause of birth, old age, sickness, and death—I proclaim that all of these are not to be done. This, Sīha, is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on inaction, and he proclaims to people a teaching of inaction.” Sīha, what is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doc- trine is based on action, and he proclaims to people a teaching of action”? Sīha, I proclaim that good bodily actions are to be done, that good verbal and mental actions are to be done. Sīha, the countless wholesome states of this kind, whose results are experienced as hap- piness, as rebirth in a good realm of existence, endowed with a long life span—I proclaim that all of these are to be done. This, Sīha, is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on action, and he proclaims to people a teaching of action.”

Sīha, what is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doc trine is based on annihilation, and he proclaims to people a teaching of annihilation”? Sīha, I proclaim that evil bodily actions are to be annihilated, that evil verbal and mental actions are to be annihilated. Sīha, the countless unwholesome and defiled states of this kind, which are the basis of future existence, which result in suffering and vexation and are the cause of birth, old age, sickness, and death—I proclaim that all of these are to be annihilated. This, Sīha, is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in say ing] “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on annihilation, and he proclaims to people a teaching of annihilation.” Sīha, what is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on abhorrence, and he proclaims to people a teaching of abhorrence”? Sīha, I proclaim that evil bodily actions are to be loathed and abhorred, that evil verbal and mental actions are to be loathed and abhorred. Sīha, the countless unwholesome and defiled states of this kind, which are the basis of future existence, which result in suffering and vexation and are the cause of birth, old age, sickness, and death—I proclaim that all of these are to be loathed and abhorred. This, Sīha, is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on abhorrence, and he proclaims to people a teaching of abhorrence.” Sīha, what is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doc trine is based on Dharma and Vinaya, and he proclaims to people a teaching of Dharma and Vinaya”? Sīha, I teach the Dharma and Vinaya for the sake of abandoning sensual desire, I declare the Dharma and Vinaya for the sake of abandoning hatred and ignorance. Sīha, the countless unwholesome and defiled states of this kind, which are the basis of future existence, which result in suffering and vexation and are the cause of birth, old age, sickness, and death—I teach the Dharma and Vinaya for the sake of abandoning these. This, Sīha, is the way in

which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on Dharma and Vinaya, and he proclaims to people a teaching of Dharma and Vinaya.” Sīha, what is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doc- trine is based on asceticism, and he proclaims to people a teaching of asceticism”? Sīha, there are renunciants and brahmins, who go naked and unclothed, who use their hands as clothes [to cover their private parts], or use leaves as clothes, or use beads as clothes; who will not use a pot to get water, or will not use a ladle to get water; who will not eat food [obtained by others] by robbery with blade and cudgel; who will not eat food obtained by deception, or by personally approaching [a donor], or by sending a faithful follower [to get it], or [when called thus:] “Come, venerable sir!”, or “Very well, venerable sir!”, or “Stay, venerable sir!” Or [there are those] who, when two are eating together, will not eat with them; or who will not eat food from a house where there is a pregnant woman, or from a house where there is a pet dog; or who will not take food from a house where flies are buzzing around excrement; or who do not eat fish, do not eat meat, do not drink alcohol, do not drink water [considered as] evil, or do not drink at all but train in the practice of not drinking; or who eat one mouthful and are content with one mouthful, or eat two mouthfuls, or three, four... or at most seven mouthfuls and are content with seven mouthfuls. Or [there are those] who eat [only the alms] they obtain at a single [house] and are content with what they obtain at a single [house], or at two [houses], or three, four... or at most seven [houses] and are content with what they obtain at seven [houses]; or who have one meal a day and are content with one meal, or one meal in two days, or in three, four, five, six, or in seven days, or in a fortnight, or who have one meal in a month and are content with one meal [in a month]. Or [there are those] who eat edible roots, or wild rice, or millet, or rice bran, or rice scum, or coarse food; who go to secluded places

and live off [what they find] in seclusion, or eat roots or eat fruits, or eat fallen fruits. Or [there are those] who clothe themselves in patchwork robes, or in robes made of hair, or in robes made of coarse fabric, or in robes made of hair and coarse fabric; or who wear complete hides, or wear pierced hides, or wear complete pierced hides; who keep their hair disheveled, or keep their hair in braids, or keep their hair disheveled and in braids, or shave their hair, or shave their beard, or shave their hair and beard, or tear out their hair, or tear out their beard, or tear out their hair and beard. Or [there are those] who stand continuously, abstaining from sitting; or move about in a squatting position; or lie down on thorns, using a bed of thorns; or lie down on fruits, using a bed of fruits; or who worship water day and night, pouring it out with their hands; or who worship fire, keeping it burning continuously. Or [there are those] who worship the sun and moon, revering them as spirits of great might, and saluting them with palms together. In these ways they experience untold suffering in the practice of self mortification. Sīha, there is such asceticism; I do not deny it. But, Sīha, such asceticism is lowly action, leading to suffering, leading to distress, a practice of worldlings; it is not the noble path. [On the other hand,] Sīha, if there are renunciants and brahmins whose method of “asceticism” consists in knowing [defilements], abandoning them, [causing them] to cease completely, rooting them out and cutting them off, so that they will never arise again, then I proclaim this “asceti cism.” Sīha, for the Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened, the method of “asceticism” consisted in knowing [defilements], aban doning them, [causing them] to cease completely, rooting them out and cutting them off, so that they would never arise again. For this rea son I practiced “asceticism.” Sīha, this is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on asceticism, and he proclaims to people a teaching of asceticism.” Again, Sīha, what is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant

Gotama’s doctrine is based on not entering a womb [to be reborn], and he proclaims to people a teaching of not entering a womb”? Sīha, if there are renunciants and brahmins who [through] higher knowledge abandon future rebirth in a womb, [causing future rebirth] to cease completely, rooting it out and cutting it off, so that it will not arise again, I proclaim that they will [indeed] not enter a womb. Sīha, the Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened, [through] higher knowledge abandoned future rebirth in a womb, [caused future rebirth] to cease completely, rooted it out, and cut it off, so that it will not arise again. For this reason, I will not again enter a womb. Sīha, this is a way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doc- trine is based on not entering a womb [to be reborn], and he proclaims to people a teaching of not entering a womb.” Again, Sīha, what is the way in which, according to the true Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doctrine is based on attaining peace, and he proclaims to people a teaching of attaining peace”? Sīha, [I] attained fully the summit of the holy life, for the sake of which a clansman^85 shaves off hair and beard, dons the yellow robe, leaves home out of faith, and goes forth to practice the path. In this very life I have personally attained understanding and awak- ening, and I dwell having personally realized. I know as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” Having attained peace myself, I bring peace to other bhikkhus, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. Having brought peace to them, I bring liberation from birth to other living beings who are subject to birth,... subject to old age... subject to disease... subject to death... I bring liberation from sorrow, sadness, and defilements to other beings who are subject to sorrow, sadness, and defilements. Sīha, this is the way in which, according to the True Dharma, one would not misrepresent [me in saying]: “The renunciant Gotama’s doc- trine is based on attaining peace, and he proclaims to people a teaching of peace.”

Senior Minister Sīha said to the World-honored One: Gotama, I have known it! Well-gone One, I have understood it! Gotama, it is as when someone with clear vision uncovers what was covered, exposes what was covered, or shows the way to one who was lost, or offers a light in the darkness, so that those with eyes can see forms. In the same way, the renunciant Gotama has taught me the Dharma using countless skillful means to reveal its meaning in various ways. World-honored One, I now go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of bhikkhus. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay follower! From this day forth until life ends I go [to him] for refuge. World-honored One, just as a person who raises a bad horse, expecting to get benefit from it, only tires himself and gets no bene fit—World-honored One, I was like this. Those foolish Nigaṇṭhas lack right knowledge; they do not know for themselves. Not recognizing the fertile field [of the Buddha’s teaching], and not examining for myself, [I] long revered them, made offerings, and paid them homage, expecting to get benefit from it; but I only suffered in vain. World-honored One, for a second time I now go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of bhikkhus. May the World honored One accept me as a lay follower! From this day forth until life ends I go [to him] for refuge. World-honored One, I was formerly ignorant. Whatever faith and respect I had for those foolish Nigaṇṭhas has today been cut off. Why? Because I was deceived. World-honored One, for a third time, I now go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of bhikkhus. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay follower! From this day forth until life ends I go [to him] for refuge. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Senior Minister Sīha and the bhikkhus were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma18-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA18]]
> ◄  [[ma17-bdk]] 📜  [[ma19-bdk]] ►
