---
sutta_code: "MA195"
sutta_title:
  - "阿濕貝 "
  - "To Assaji"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA195]]
> ◄  [[ma194-bdk]] 📜  [[ma196-bdk]] ►

### 195. The Discourse to Assaji

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling in the Kāsi country together with a large sangha of bhikkhus. While dwelling at a certain place, he addressed the bhikkhus: I eat only during the day.^107 Eating only during the day, I am without pre occupation, without pursuit, and without sickness or pain. My body is light, strong, and healthy, and I am happy and at ease. You too should train in eating only during the day. Eating only during the day, you will be without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your bodies will be light, strong, and healthy, and you will be happy and at ease. At that time the World-honored One promulgated the rule on eating only during the day for the sangha of bhikkhus. The bhikkhus in the sangha all respectfully trained in this rule and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World honored One. Then the World-honored One proceeded in stages to Kīṭāgiri and stayed in a grove of siṃsapā trees north of the village of Kīṭāgiri. At that time in Kīṭāgiri there were two bhikkhus, one called Assaji and a second called Punabbasuka, who had formerly been landlords, heads of tem ples, and clan leaders.^108 They ate in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon. Eating in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon, they were without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Their bodies were light, strong, and healthy, and they were happy and at ease. Having heard this, a group of many bhikkhus approached the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka and said to them: Assaji and Punabbasuka, the World-honored One has been dwelling in the Kāsi country together with a large sangha of bhikkhus. While dwelling in a certain place, he said to the bhikkhus, “I eat only during the day. Eating only during the day, I am without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. My body is light, strong, and healthy, and I am happy and at ease. You too should train in eating only during the day. Eating only during the day, you will be without preoccupation, without

pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your bodies will be light, strong, and healthy, and you will be happy and at ease.” At that time the World-honored One promulgated the rule on eating only during the day for the sangha of bhikkhus. The bhikkhus in the sangha all respectfully train in this rule and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. Assaji and Punabbasuka, you too should train in eating only during the day. Eating only during the day, you will be without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your bodies will be light, strong, and healthy, and you will be happy and at ease. Do not disobey the World-honored One and the sangha of bhikkhus.^109 Hearing this, Assaji and Punabbasuka replied: Venerable Ones, we eat in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon. Eating in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon, we are without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Our bodies are light, strong, and healthy, and we are happy and at ease. Why should we give up something in the present in expectation of something in the future? In the same way [it went] a second and a third time.^110 The group of many bhikkhus was unable to get Assaji and Punabbasuka to give up that evil wrong view. They rose from their seats, took leave of them, and left. They approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and stood to one side, they said:

World-honored One, in this Kīṭāgiri there are two bhikkhus, one called Assaji and the second called Punabbasuka, who were formerly landlords, heads of temples, and clan leaders. They eat in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon. Eating in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon, they are without preoccupation, without pur suit, and without sickness and pain. Their bodies are light, strong, and healthy, and they are happy and at ease. World-honored One, having heard this, we approached the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka and said to them, “Assaji and Punabbasuka, the World-honored One has been dwelling in the Kāsi country together with

a large sangha of bhikkhus. While dwelling in a certain place, he said to the bhikkhus, ‘I eat only during the day. Eating only during the day, I am without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. My body is light, strong, and healthy, and I am happy and at ease. You too should train in eating only during the day. Eating only during the day, you will be without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your bodies will be light, strong, and healthy, and you will be happy and at ease.’ “At that time the World-honored One promulgated the rule on eating only during the day for the sangha of bhikkhus. The bhikkhus of the sangha all respectfully train in this rule and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. Assaji and Punabbasuka, you too should train in eating only during the day. Eating only during the day, you will be without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your bodies will be light, strong, and healthy, and you will be happy and at ease. Do not disobey the World-honored One and the sangha of bhikkhus.” Hearing this, Assaji and Punabbasuka replied, “Venerable Ones, we eat in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon. Eating in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon, we are without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Our bodies are light, strong, and healthy, and we are happy and at ease. Why should we give up something in the present in expectation of some thing in the future?” In the same way [it went] a second and a third time. World-honored One, being unable to get Assaji and Punabbasuka to give up that evil wrong view, we rose from our seats, took leave of them, and left. Hearing this, the World-honored One said to a certain monk, “Approach the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka and say this: ‘Assaji and Punabbasuka, the World-honored One summons you.’” Hearing this, the monk [said], “Yes, World-honored One,” rose from his seat, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. He approached the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka and said this: “Assaji and Punabbasuka, the World-honored One summons you.” Hearing this, Assaji and Punabbasuka approached the Buddha, paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side.

The World-honored One asked them:

Assaji and Punabbasuka, is it true that a group of many bhikkhus approached you and said to you, “bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka, the World-honored One has been dwelling in the Kāsi country together with a large sangha of bhikkhus. While dwelling in a certain place, he said to the bhikkhus, ‘I eat only during the day. Eating only during the day, I am without preoccupa- tion, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. My body is light, strong, and healthy, and I am happy and at ease. You too should train in eating only during the day. Eating only during the day, you will be without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your bodies will be light, strong, and healthy, and you will be happy and at ease.’ “At that time the World-honored One promulgated the rule on eating only during the day for the sangha of bhikkhus. The bhikkhus of the sangha all respectfully train in this rule and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. Assaji and Punabbasuka, you too should train in eating only during the day. Eating only during the day, you will be without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your body will be light, strong, and healthy, and you will be happy and at ease. Do not disobey the World-honored One and the sangha of bhikkhus!” Assaji and Punabbasuka, hearing this, you said to the bhikkhus:, “Ven- erable Ones, we eat in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon. Eating in the morning, in the evening, and during the day beyond noon, we are without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Our bodies are light, strong, and healthy, and we are happy and at ease. Why should we give up something in the present in expectation of something in the future?” In the same way [it went] a second and a third time. Assaji and Pun- abbasuka, being unable to get you to give up that evil wrong view, the bhikkhus rose from their seats, took leave of you and left?

Assaji and Punabbasuka replied, “That is true.” The World-honored One said:

Assaji and Punabbasuka, do you know me to have taught the Dharma in this way: “If someone experiences pleasant feeling, then after they have

experienced pleasant feeling, evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease. If someone experiences painful feeling, then after they have experienced painful feeling, evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase”?^111 Assaji and Punabbasuka replied: Yes, we know the World-honored One to have taught the Dharma in this way: “If someone experiences pleasant feeling, then after they have expe rienced pleasant feeling, [evil and] unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease. If someone experiences painful feeling, then after they have experienced painful feeling, [evil and] unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase.” The World-honored One scolded the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka: You foolish men! From where do you know me to have taught the Dharma in this way? You foolish men! From whose mouth have you heard it, that you know me to have taught the Dharma in this way? You foolish men! What I have never stated, you take me to have stated. You foolish men!^112 When you were being spoken to by the group of many bhikkhus, it would have been proper and in accordance with the Dharma for you to reply, “We do not know. We should ask these bhikkhus.” At that time the World-honored One said to the [group of many] bhikkhus: Do you too know me to have taught the Dharma in this way: “If someone experiences pleasant feeling, then after they have experienced pleasant feeling, [evil and] unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease. If someone experiences painful feeling, then after they have experienced painful feeling, [evil and] unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase”? The group of many bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One asked them again, “How do you know me to have taught the Dharma?” The group of many bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, we know the World-honored One to have taught the

Dharma in this way: “It may be that for someone experiencing pleasant feeling, evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease; [or] it may be that for someone experiencing pleasant feeling, evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase. It may be that for someone experiencing painful feeling, evil and unwhole- some states increase and wholesome states decrease; [or] it may be that for someone experiencing painful feeling, evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase.” World-honored One, we know the World-honored One to have taught the Dharma in this way.

Hearing this, the World-honored One praised the bhikkhus, saying:

It is well, it is well, as you say, it may be that for someone experiencing pleasant feeling, evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease; [or] it may be that for someone experiencing pleasant feeling, evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase. It may be that for someone experiencing painful feeling, evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease; [or] it may be that for someone experiencing painful feeling, evil and unwhole- some states decrease and wholesome states increase. Why is that? I indeed speak in this way: “It may be that for someone experiencing pleasant feeling, evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease; [or] it may be that for someone experiencing pleasant feeling, evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase. It may be that for someone experiencing painful feeling, evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease; [or] it may be that for someone experiencing painful feeling, evil and unwhole- some states decrease and wholesome states increase.” If I had not known as it really is, had not seen, had not understood, had not grasped, had not completely and rightly realized that there are pleasant feelings with which [evil and] unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease, then it would not be proper for me to recom- mend the abandoning of these pleasant feelings. If I had not known as it really is, had not seen, had not understood, had not grasped, had not completely and rightly realized that there are pleasant feelings with which evil and unwholesome states decrease and

wholesome states increase, then it would not be proper for me to recom mend the cultivation of these pleasant feelings. If I had not known as it really is, had not seen, had not understood, had not grasped, had not completely and rightly realized that there are painful feelings with which evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease, then it would not be proper for me to recom mend the abandoning of these painful feelings. If I had not known as it really is, had not seen, had not understood, had not grasped, had not completely and rightly realized that there are painful feelings with which evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase, then it would not be proper for me to recom mend the cultivation of these painful feelings.^113 Because I have known as it really is, have seen, have understood, have grasped, have completely and rightly realized that there are pleasant feelings with which evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease, therefore I recommend the abandoning of these pleasant feelings. Because I have known as it really is, have seen, have understood, have grasped, have completely and rightly realized that there are pleasant feelings with which evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase, therefore I recommend the cultivation of these pleasant feelings. Because I have known as it really is, have seen, have understood, have grasped, have completely and rightly realized that there are painful feelings with which evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease, therefore I recommend the abandoning of these painful feelings. Because I have known as it really is, have seen, have understood, have grasped, have completely and rightly realized that there are painful feelings with which evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase, therefore I recommend the cultivation of these painful feelings. Why is that? I do not recommend cultivating all bodily pleasure and I also do not rec ommend not cultivating all bodily pleasure. I do not recommend cultivating all bodily pain and I also do not recommend not cultivating all bodily pain. I do not recommend cultivating all mental pleasure and I also do not recom mend not cultivating all mental pleasure. I do not recommend cultivating all mental pain and I also do not recommend not cultivating all mental pain.^114

Of what bodily pleasure do I say that it is not to be cultivated? If a bodily pleasure is being cultivated and evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease, then I say of such bodily pleasure that it is not to be cultivated. Of what bodily pleasure do I say that it is to be cultivated? If a bodily pleasure is being cultivated and evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase, then I say of such bodily pleasure that it is to be cultivated. Of what bodily pain do I say that it is not to be cultivated? If a bodily pain is being cultivated and evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease, then I say of such bodily pain that it is not to be cultivated. Of what bodily pain do I say that it is to be cultivated? If a bodily pain is being cultivated and evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase, then I say of such bodily pain that it is to be cultivated. Of what mental pleasure do I say that it is not to be cultivated? If a mental pleasure is being cultivated and evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease, then I say of such mental pleasure that it is not to be cultivated. Of what mental pleasure do I say that it is to be cultivated? If a mental pleasure is being cultivated and evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase, then I say of such mental pleasure that it is to be cultivated. Of what mental pain do I say that it is not to be cultivated? If a mental pain is being cultivated and evil and unwholesome states increase and wholesome states decrease, then I say of such mental pain that it is not to be cultivated. Of what mental pain do I say that it is to be cultivated? If a mental pain is being cultivated and evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase, then I say of such mental pain that it is to be cultivated. One knows as it really is things that should be cultivated and one knows as it really is things that should not be cultivated. Having known as it really is things that should be cultivated and having known as it really is things that should not be cultivated, one then does not cultivate things that should not be cultivated and one cultivates things that should be cultivated. When

one does not cultivate things that should not be cultivated, and cultivates things that should be cultivated, evil and unwholesome states decrease and wholesome states increase.^115 I do not say that all bhikkhus [need to] practice with diligence and I also do not say that all bhikkhus do not [need to] practice with diligence. Of what bhikkhus do I say that they do not [need to] practice with diligence? [I say this:] “If a monk is liberated in both ways. How is a monk lib erated in both ways? If a monk dwells having directly experienced the eight liberations and, having seen with wisdom, knows that his taints are destroyed, then such a monk is liberated both ways.”^116 Of this monk I say that he does not [need to] practice with diligence. Why is that? This venerable one formerly practiced with diligence; it is impossible that this venerable one was formerly negligent. For this reason I say that this monk does not [need to] practice with diligence. [I also say this:] “If a monk who, not being liberated in both ways, is liberated by wisdom. How is a monk liberated by wisdom? If a monk dwells not having directly experienced the eight liberations, [yet] having seen with wisdom, knows that his taints are destroyed, then such a monk is liberated by wisdom.” Of this monk I say that he does not [need to] practice with diligence. Why is that? This venerable one has formerly practiced with diligence; it is impossible that this venerable one was formerly negligent. For this reason I say that this monk does not [need to] practice with diligence. Of these two [types of] bhikkhus I say that they do not [need to] practice diligently. Of what bhikkhus do I say that they do [need to] practice with diligence? [I say this] if a monk is not liberated in both ways and not liberated by wisdom, but is a body witness. How is a monk a body witness? If a monk dwells having directly experienced the eight liberations but does not know, through having seen with wisdom, that the taints are destroyed, then such a monk is a body witness. Of such a monk I say that he does [need to] practice with diligence. What fruit do I see in this monk practicing with diligence, on account of which I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence?

If this monk seeks [to cultivate] the faculties, learns from good friends, and appropriately practices abiding in tranquility, then, by eradicating the taints, he will attain the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation through wisdom. In this very life, he will dwell having personally under- stood, personally awakened, and personally realized, understanding as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” I see such fruit in this monk practicing with diligence, and therefore I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence. [I say this also:] “If a monk is not liberated in both ways, not liberated by wisdom, and not a body witness, but has arrived at view. How does a monk arrive at view? If a monk has consistently firm faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, in accordance with the Dharma as he has heard it, and through wisdom gains increased insight and increased accept- ance of it, then such a monk has arrived at view.” Of such a monk I say that he does [need to] practice with diligence. What fruit do I see in this monk practicing with diligence, on account of which I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence? If this monk seeks [to cultivate] the faculties, learns from good friends, and appropriately practices abiding in tranquility, then, by eradicating the taints, he will attain the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation through wisdom. In this very life, he will dwell having personally under- stood, personally awakened, and personally realized, understanding as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” I see such fruit in this monk practicing with diligence, and therefore I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence. [I say this also:] “If a monk is not liberated in both ways, not liberated by wisdom, not a body witness, and has not arrived at view, but is liberated by faith. How is a monk liberated by faith? If a monk has consistently firm faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, in accordance with the Dharma as he has heard it, and through wisdom gains insight and acceptance of it, which are less than those of one arrived at view, then such a monk is liberated by faith.”

Of such a monk I say that he does [need to] practice with diligence. What fruit do I see in this monk practicing with diligence, on account of which I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence? If this monk seeks [to cultivate] the faculties, learns from good friends, and appropriately practices abiding in tranquility, then, by eradicating the taints, he will attain the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation through wisdom. In this very life, he will dwell having personally under stood, personally awakened, and personally realized, understanding as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” I see such fruit in this monk practicing with diligence; therefore I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence. [I say this also:] “If a monk is not liberated in both ways, not liberated by wisdom, not a body witness, not arrived at view, and not liberated by faith, but is a Dharma follower. How is a monk a Dharma follower? If a monk has consistently firm faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, in accordance with the Dharma as he has heard it, and he has [not yet],^117 through wisdom, gained increased insight and increased acceptance of it, then such a monk is a Dharma follower.”^118 Of such a monk I say that he does [need to] practice with diligence. What fruit do I see in this monk practicing with diligence, on account of which I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence? If this monk seeks [to cultivate] the faculties, learns from good friends, and appropriately practices abiding in tranquility, then he will certainly attain one of two fruits: either final knowledge here and now or, if there is a remainder [of clinging], attainment of nonreturning. I see such fruit in this monk practicing with diligence, and therefore I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence. [I say this also:] “If a monk is not liberated in both ways, not liberated by wisdom, not a body witness, not arrived at view, not liberated by faith, and not a Dharma follower, but is a faith follower. How is a monk a faith follower? If a monk has consistently firm faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, in accordance with the Dharma as he has heard it, and has [not yet] through wisdom gained insight and acceptance of it, which are less than those of a Dharma follower, then such a monk is a faith follower.”

Of such a monk I say that he does [need to] practice with diligence. What fruit do I see in this monk practicing with diligence, on account of which I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence? If this monk seeks [to cultivate] the faculties, learns from good friends, and appropriately practices abiding in tranquility, then he will certainly attain one of two fruits: either final knowledge here and now or, if there is a remainder [of clinging], attainment of nonreturning. I see such fruit in this monk practicing with diligence, and therefore I say that this monk does [need to] practice with diligence. Of all these bhikkhus I say that they do [need to] practice with diligence. I do not say that all bhikkhus attain final knowledge, and I also do not say that all bhikkhus attain final knowledge at the outset; rather, gradual practice and training gives rise to the results. By accepting instruction and accepting admonition, bhikkhus attain final knowledge. This is how bhikkhus attain final knowledge. How is it that gradual practice and training gives rise to the results, that by accepting instruction and accepting admonition bhikkhus attain final knowledge? How is it that bhikkhus attain final knowledge? Suppose that someone who has faith approaches [a teacher]; having approached, he pays respect; having paid respect, he listens to the Dharma with unified mind; having listened to the Dharma with unified mind, he memorizes the Dharma; having memorized the Dharma, he reflects on it; having reflected on it, he weighs it up; having weighed it up, he examines it; having examined it, the noble disciple directly realizes it, with wisdom and superior insight. He thinks, “[Until now] I had never directly realized this truth, being without wisdom and superior insight. Now I have directly realized this truth with wisdom and superior insight.” In this way gradual practice and training leads to the results. After accepting instruction and accepting admonition, bhikkhus attain final knowledge. This is how bhikkhus attain final knowledge. Then the World-honored One said, “Assaji and Punabbasuka, there is a teaching called ‘in four phrases,’ which I wish to teach you. Do you wish to know it?”^119 Assaji and Punabbasuka said, “World-honored One, who are we? How could we understand the Dharma?”

Then the World-honored One thought, “These foolish men! They have transgressed my true Dharma and discipline and have long been far removed from it.” [He said]: Even if a teacher of Dharma and discipline is greedily attached to food, not detached from food, his disciples should not quickly become negligent in their practice—how much more so if [the teacher] is myself, who am not greedily attached to food but remote and detached from food. A faithful disciple should speak like this: “The World-honored One is my teacher; I am the World-honored One’s disciple. The World-honored One teaches me the Dharma; the Well-gone One teaches me the Dharma. May I for a long time derive benefit [from it]! May I attain welfare, peace, and happiness [from it]!”^120 A faithful disciple who has done much in the domain of the World-hon ored One, who has found much welfare in the domain of the World-honored One, who has practiced much in the domain of the World-honored One, who has entered the domain of the World-honored One and become stable in the domain of the World-honored One—if he wanders in the eastern region, he will certainly be at ease, without the multitude of sufferings; if he wanders in the southern region... the western region... the northern region, he will certainly be at ease, without the multitude of sufferings.^121 If a faithful disciple has done much in the domain of the World-honored One, has found much welfare in the domain of the World-honored One, has practiced much in the domain of the World-honored One, has entered the domain of the World-honored One and become stable in the domain of the World-honored One—of him I do not say merely that he is established in wholesome conditions, let alone that he regresses; rather [I say] that he will increase in wholesome conditions, by day and by night, without regressing. If a faithful disciple has done much in the domain of the World-honored One, has found much welfare in the domain of the World-honored One, has practiced much in the domain of the World-honored One, has entered the domain of the World-honored One and become stable in the domain of the World-honored One, then he will certainly attain one of two fruits: either final knowledge here and now or, if there is a remainder [of clinging], attainment of nonreturning.

Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma195-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN3.65]], [[MN27]], [[MN95]], [[SN48.44]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA195]]
> ◄  [[ma194-bdk]] 📜  [[ma196-bdk]] ►
