---
sutta_code: "MA196"
sutta_title:
  - "七車 "
  - "Seven Chariots"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA196]]
> ◄  [[ma195-bdk]] 📜  [[ma197-bdk]] ►

### 196. The Discourse to Cuṇḍa

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling among the Vajjians, staying at the village of Sāma. At that time the novice Cuṇḍa had been spending the rains retreat in Pāvā. In Pāvā there was a Nigaṇṭha called Ñātaputta, who had [just] died. Not long after his death the disciples of the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta had broken up into factions and there was a lack of communal harmony. They had all been speak- ing divisively, no longer conducting their affairs harmoniously. They had been mutually entangling themselves in arguments, disputing acrimoniously with one another, [saying,] “I know this teaching; you do not know it. How could you know any teaching as I know it? I am coherent; you are incoherent. I am consistent; you are inconsistent. What should be stated first, you have stated last; what should be stated last, you have stated first. I am victorious over you; you are no match for me.^123 When I ask you something, you are unable to reply; I have already defeated you. Let me ask you again; if you make a move, I will entangle you again.” Ever more mutually arrogant, they had kept trying to outdo one another in discussion, and no one was there to reprove them. The white-clothed lay disciples of the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta had all become dissatisfied with these [monastic] disciples of the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta. Why was that? It was because of the bad doctrine and discipline that he had taught, which did not provide a way out [of _dukkha_ ], did not lead to full awakening. Not taught by a well- gone one, it was falling apart and unstable,^124 lacking anything reliable. The teacher they venerated was not a tathāgata, not free from attachment and fully awakened. Then, having completed the rains retreat, the three months being over, having mended his robes, the novice Cuṇḍa took his robes and bowl and approached the village of Sāma to stay in a _siṃsapā_ grove north of the village of Sāma.^125 The novice Cuṇḍa approached the venerable Ānanda and, having arrived, paid homage at his feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. The ven- erable Ānanda said, “Venerable friend Cuṇḍa, where have you come from? In what place did you spend the rains retreat?”

The novice Cuṇḍa said: Venerable Ānanda, I have come from Pāvā. I spent the rains retreat in Pāvā. Venerable Ānanda, in Pāvā there was a Nigaṇṭha called Nātaputta, who had [just] died. Not long after his death the disciples of the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta had broken up into factions, and there was a lack of communal harmony. They have all been speaking divisively, no longer conducting their affairs harmoniously. They have been mutually entangling themselves in arguments, disputing acrimoniously with one another, [saying,] “I know this teaching; you do not know it. How could you know any teaching as I know it? I am coherent; you are incoherent. I am consistent; you are inconsistent. What should be stated first, you have stated last; what should be stated last, you have stated first. I am victorious over you; you are no match for me. When I ask you something, you are unable to reply; I have already defeated you. Let me ask you again; if you make a move, I will entangle you again.” Ever more mutually arrogant, they have kept trying to outdo one another in discussion, and no one has been there to reprove them. The white- clothed lay disciples of the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta have all become dissatisfied with these [monastic] disciples of the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta. Why is that? It is because of the bad doctrine and discipline that he taught, which does not provide a way out [of _dukkha_ ], does not lead to full awakening. Not taught by a well-gone one, it is falling apart and unstable, lacking anything reliable. The teacher they venerated was not a tathāgata, not free from attachment and fully awakened. On hearing this, the venerable Ānanda said: Venerable friend Cuṇḍa, given what you have said, we should go and see the Buddha and respectfully present it to the World-honored One. Venerable friend Cuṇḍa, let us now together approach the Buddha and tell the World- honored One about this matter. It may be that because of this we will get to hear a special teaching from the World-honored One. Then the venerable Ānanda and the novice Cuṇḍa together approached the Buddha and paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet. The ven- erable Ānanda stepped back and stood to one side, and the novice Cuṇḍa stepped back and sat to one side.^126

The venerable Ānanda said:

World-honored One, today the novice Cuṇḍa approached me, paid homage with his head at my feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. I said, “Ven- erable friend Cuṇḍa, where have you come from? In what place did you spend the rains retreat?” The novice Cuṇḍa said, “Venerable Ānanda, I have come from Pāvā, I spent the rains retreat at Pāvā. Venerable Ānanda, in Pāvā there was a Nigaṇṭha called Ñātaputta, who had just died. Not long after his death the disciples of Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta had broken up into factions, and there was a lack of communal harmony. They have all been speaking divisively, no longer conducting their affairs harmoniously. They have been mutually entangling themselves in arguments, disputing acrimoniously with one another, [saying,] ‘I know this teaching; you do not know it. How could you know any teaching as I know it? I am coherent; you are incoherent. I am consistent; you are inconsistent. What should be stated first, you have stated last; what should be stated last, you have stated first. I am victorious over you; you are no match for me. When I ask you something, you are unable to reply; I have already defeated you. Let me ask you again; if you make a move, I will entangle you again.’ “Ever more mutually arrogant, they have kept trying to outdo one another in discussion, and no one has been there to reprove them. The white-clothed lay disciples of the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta have all become dissatisfied with these [monastic] disciples of the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta. Why is that? It is because of the bad doctrine and discipline that he taught, which does not provide a way out [of _dukkha_ ], does not lead to full awak- ening. Not taught by a well-gone one, it is falling apart and unstable, lacking anything reliable. The teacher they venerated was not a tathāgata, not free from attachment and fully awakened.” World-honored One, on hearing this, I became afraid and alarmed, the hairs on my body stood up on end, [and I thought,] “Let not any monk give rise to such a dispute in the sangha after the World-honored One has passed away! Such disputation would be to the detriment of many persons, the suffering of many persons; it would not be to their benefit, not for their welfare, not for their peace and happiness. It might even give rise to extreme suffering and distress among _deva_ s and human beings.”

World-honored One, [sometimes] I see a monk seated before the World honored One, being deeply respectful toward the World-honored One, well restrained in the presence of the Well-gone One.^127 World-honored One, on seeing this I think, “Suppose that, after the World-honored One has passed away, this monk were to cause the arising of disputes within the sangha, disputes such as would be to the detriment of many people, the suffering of many people, not to their benefit, not for their welfare, not for their peace and happiness, such as might even give rise to extreme suffering and distress among deva s and human beings.” At this the World-honored One asked: Ānanda, in your view, what kind of dispute within the sangha is such that this dispute would be to the detriment of many persons, the suffering of many persons, not to their benefit, not for their welfare, not for their peace and happiness, such as might even give rise to extreme suffering and dis tress among deva s and human beings?^128 The venerable Ānanda replied: World-honored One, there could be a dispute that is [not] about the higher morality, the higher mind, or the higher insight which, having once arisen within the sangha, could keep on arising. World-honored One, such a dis pute would be to the detriment of many persons, making for the suffering of many persons; it would not be to their benefit, not for their welfare, not for their peace and happiness; it might even give rise to extreme suf fering and distress among deva s and human beings. The World-honored One said: Ānanda, there could be a dispute about some very slight matter, namely one that is [not] about the higher morality, the higher mind, or the higher insight.^129 [However], Ānanda, if there did exist a dispute about the path [or] about the stages of the path which, having once arisen within the sangha, would keep on arising, then, Ānanda, such a dispute would [indeed] be to the detriment of many people, making for the suffering of many people; it would not be to their benefit, not for their welfare, not for their peace and happiness.

Ānanda, do you see here [even] two bhikkhus who are of differing opin- ions, giving rise to a dispute: “This is Dharma; this is not Dharma. This is the discipline; this is not the discipline. This is an offense; this is not an offense. It is a minor [offense]; it is a grave [offense]. It can be atoned for; it cannot be atoned for. It can be restrained; it cannot be restrained. There is a remainder; there is no remainder. It has occurred; it has not occurred”? Ānanda, [is this] what you think of? There is the collection of my teachings, which I came to understand by myself, awakened to by myself, realized by myself, namely: the four establishments of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of [supernormal] power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awak- ening factors, and the eight factors of the noble path [which can forestall such dispute]. [However], Ānanda, the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta was not actually omnis- cient, though he himself claimed to be omniscient.^130 Ānanda, if the Nigaṇṭha Ñātaputta had been all-knowing and all-seeing, then he would have set forth for his disciples the “six roots of disputation,” so that, on hearing a dispute, a disciple could settle it himself. Then the venerable Ānanda, extending his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, said:

World-honored One, now is the right time, Well-gone One, now is the right time. If the World-honored One teaches the bhikkhus about the six roots of disputation, then having heard it from the World-honored One, the bhikkhus will receive it and remember it well. The World-honored One said, “Ānanda, listen closely and pay proper attention. I will explain it to you in detail.” The venerable Ānanda said, “Cer- tainly. We shall listen to receive the teaching.” The Buddha said: Ānanda, suppose a person is entangled in the bondage of anger and resent- ment [which is the first of the six roots of disputation]. Ānanda, being entangled in the bondage of anger and resentment, that person becomes disrespectful of the teacher, cannot see the Dharma, and does not keep the precepts. Being disrespectful of the teacher, not seeing the Dharma,

and not keeping the precepts, he gives rise to a dispute within the sangha, a dispute that is to the detriment of many people, makes for the suffering of many people; it will not be to their benefit, not for their welfare, not for their peace and happiness, even giving rise to extreme suffering and distress among deva s and human beings. Ānanda, in the case of such a dispute, if you see, internally or externally, that [the root of it] has not been eliminated, then, in order to cut off this dispute [at its root], you should quickly seek a means, and train [in applying it] with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, and with unremitting endurance. Ānanda, it is just as a person whose head is on fire or whose clothes are on fire will quickly seek a means to save his head or to save his clothes.^131 In the same way, in the case of a dispute, if you see, internally or externally, that it has not been eliminated, then, in order to cut off this dispute [at its root] you should quickly seek a means, and train [in applying it] with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, and with unremitting endurance. Ānanda, in the case of such a dispute, if you see, internally or externally, that it has been eliminated [at its root], then you should strongly protect that [state of] mind, being constantly diligent, because of wishing to settle this dispute. In this way you will cut off the root of this dispute. Ānanda, just as a person whose head is on fire or whose clothes are on fire will quickly seek a means to save his head or to save his clothes, in the same way, in the case of a dispute, if you see, internally or externally, that it has been eliminated [at its root], you should strongly protect that [state of] mind, being constantly diligent, because of wishing to settle this dispute. In this way, with regard to this dispute, you will cut off the root of it. It is the same with [the other five roots of disputation]: silent sulk ing... avarice and envy... flattery and deceit... shamelessness and recklessness... evil desire and wrong view of a person who is of an evil nature and unable to restrain himself.^132 Ānanda, if a person has evil desire and wrong view, and is of an evil nature and unable to restrain himself, then he is disrespectful to the teacher, does not see the Dharma, and does not keep the precepts. Being disrespectful to the teacher, not seeing the Dharma, and not keeping the precepts, he gives rise in the sangha to a

dispute, a dispute such as would be to the detriment of many people, the suffering of many people; it would not be to their benefit, not for their welfare, not for their peace and happiness, even giving rise to extreme suffering and distress among _deva_ s and human beings. Ānanda, in the case of such a dispute, if you see, internally or externally, that [the root of it] has not been eliminated, then, in order to cut off [the root of] this dispute you should quickly seek a means, and train [in applying it] with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, and with unremitting endurance. Ānanda, just as a person whose head is on fire or whose clothes are on fire will quickly seek a means to save his head or to save his clothes, in the same way, in the case of a dispute, if you see, internally or externally, that [the root of it] has not been eliminated, then, in order to cut off [the root of] this dispute you should quickly seek a means, and train [in applying it] with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, and with unremitting endurance. Ānanda, in the case of such a dispute, if you see, internally or externally, that [the root of it] has been eliminated, then you should strongly protect that [state of] mind, being constantly diligent, because of wishing to settle this dispute. In this way you will cut off the root of this dispute. Ānanda, just as a person whose head is on fire or whose clothes are on fire will quickly seek a means to save his head or to save his clothes, in the same way, in the case of a dispute, if you see, internally or externally, that [the root of it] has been eliminated, then you should strongly protect that state of mind, being constantly diligent, because of wishing to settle this dis- pute. In this way, with regard to this dispute, you will cut off the root of it. Again, Ānanda, there are seven kinds of settlement of litigation.^133 One: settlement of litigation by encounter; two: settlement of litigation by [loss of] memory; three: settlement of litigation by non-insanity; four: settlement of litigation by self-confession; five: settlement of litigation by [pronouncement of] ;^134 six: settlement of litigation by circulating around; seven: settlement of litigation that is like a broom for sweeping away excrement. Ānanda, what is settlement of litigation by encounter? How is some lit- igation decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by encounter?

Ānanda, one person reproves one person, protected by the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and this encounter delights them.^135 One person [reproves] two persons... one person [reproves] many persons... one person reproves a sangha, protected by the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and this encounter delights them. Two persons reprove two persons, protected by the Dharma and the dis cipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and this encounter delights them. Two persons [reprove] many persons... two persons [reprove] a sangha... two persons reprove one person, protected by the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and this encounter delights them. Many persons reprove many persons, protected by the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and this encounter delights them. Many persons [reprove] a sangha... many persons [reprove] one person... many persons reprove two persons, protected by the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instruc tions of the respected teacher, and this encounter delights them. A sangha reproves a sangha, protected by the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and this encounter delights them. A sangha [reproves] one person... a sangha [reproves] two persons... a sangha reproves many persons, protected by the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and this encounter delights them. Ānanda, this is what is called settlement of litigation by encounter. This is how a certain kind of litigation is decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by encounter. Ānanda, what is settlement of litigation by [loss of] memory? How is some litigation decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by [loss of] memory? Ānanda, suppose that a certain person has violated the precepts but does not remember doing so. Seeing this, the bhikkhus say to him, “You have violated the precepts but you do not remember doing so.^136 You should request from the sangha settlement by [loss of] memory and the sangha will together grant the venerable one settlement by [loss of] memory.”

Ānanda, that monk should approach a place where the sangha is assem- bled in harmony, arrange his robe so as to bare one shoulder, take off his sandals, join the sangha, and pay homage with his head at the feet of the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of them.^137 Kneeling down and extending his hands with joined palms, he should say to the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of them, “Venerable sirs, hear this! I have violated the precepts but do not remember doing so. I now request from the sangha settlement by [loss of] memory. May the sangha, assembled in harmony, grant me settlement by [loss of] memory!” Ānanda, for that monk the sangha, assembled in harmony, grants settle- ment by [loss of] memory, in accordance with the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and the encounter delights them. Ānanda, this is what is called settlement of litigation by [loss of] memory. This is how a certain kind of litigation is decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by [loss of] memory. Ānanda, what is settlement of litigation by non-insanity? How is some litigation decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by non- insanity? Ānanda, suppose that insanity has arisen in a person and his mind is deranged. Insanity having arisen in him and his mind being deranged, he performs many impure actions that are contrary to the Dharma of a renunciant, that do not accord with practice of the Dharma; and he is declared to have committed an offense. At a later time he returns to his original mental condition. Seeing this, the [other] bhikkhus say to him,^138 “Formerly insanity had arisen in you and your mind was deranged. Insanity having arisen in you and your mind being deranged, you performed many impure actions that are contrary to the Dharma of a renunciant, that do not accord with practice of the Dharma; and you were declared to have committed an offense. Venerable friend, you later returned to your original mental condition. Venerable friend, request from the sangha settlement by non-insanity. The sangha will together grant the venerable one settlement by non-insanity.” Ānanda, that monk should approach a place where the sangha is assem- bled in harmony, arrange his robe so as to bare one shoulder, take off his sandals, join the sangha, and pay homage with his head at the feet of the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of them. Kneeling down

and extending his hands with palms together, he should say to the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of them, “Venerable sirs, hear this! Insanity once arose in me and my mind was deranged. Insanity having arisen in me and my mind being deranged, I performed many impure actions that do not [conform to] the Dharma of a renunciant, that do not accord with the practice of the Dharma, and I was declared to have com mitted an offense. I have since returned to my original mental condition. I now request from the sangha settlement by non-insanity. May the sangha, assembled in harmony, grant me settlement by non-insanity!” Ānanda, for that monk the sangha, assembled in harmony, grants set tlement by non-insanity, according to the Dharma and the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected teacher, and the encounter delights them. Ānanda, this is what is called settlement of litigation by non-insanity. This is how a certain kind of litigation is decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by non-insanity. Ānanda, what is settlement of litigation by self-confession? How is some litigation decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by self-confession? Ānanda, suppose that some person has violated the pre cepts. He may have acknowledged this or he may not have acknowledged it. He may remember it or he may not remember it. Ānanda, that monk should approach a place where the sangha is assembled in harmony, arrange his robe so as to bare one shoulder, take off his sandals, join the sangha, and pay homage with his head at the feet of the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of them. Kneeling down and extending his hands with joined palms, he should say to the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of them, “Venerable sirs, hear this! I have vio lated such and such precepts. I have now come before the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of you with the sincere intention of confessing it, of revealing it personally, not daring to hide it. I shall guard myself more skillfully, so as not to do it again later.” Ānanda, the sangha of bhikkhus should ask that monk, “Does the ven erable one himself see his violation?” He should answer, “I myself truly see my violation.” The sangha should tell him, “Guard yourself more skillfully so as not to do it again!” Ānanda, this is what is called settlement

of litigation by self-confession. This is how a certain kind of litigation is decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by self-confession. Ānanda, what is settlement of litigation by [pronouncement of] ? How is some litigation decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by [pronouncement of] ? Ānanda, suppose that a person does not know shame and does not regret what has been seen or heard [about him], and is therefore suspected by others of having evil desires. Having committed an offense, he on the one hand declares that he [does not] know about it,^139 and on the other hand declares that he [does not] see it [as an offense]. Having on the one hand declared that he does [not] know about it, he on the other hand declares that he [does not] see it [as an offense]; and having on the one hand declared that he [does not] see it [as an offense], he on the other hand declares that he does [not] know about it. When among the sangha he on the one hand declares that he does [not] know about it, and when among the sangha he on the other hand declares that he [does not] see it [as an offense]. Having on the one hand declared that he [does not] know about it, he on the other hand declares that he [does not] see it [as an offense]; and having on the one hand declared that he [does not] see it [as an offense], he on the other hand declares that he [does not] know about it.^140 Ānanda, for that monk the sangha, assembled in harmony, grants the settlement by [pronouncement of] , “Sir, you are being unprincipled and unreasonable. Sir, you are being evil and unskillful. Why is that? “Sir, having committed an offense, you on the one hand declare that you do [not] know about it and on the other hand declare that you do [not] see it [as an offense]. Having on the one hand declared that you do [not] know about it, you on the other hand declare that you do [not] see it [as an offense]; and having on the one hand declared that you do [not] see it [as an offense], you on the other hand declare that you know [you have done it]. “When among the sangha, you on the one hand declare that you do [not] know about it, and when among the sangha you on the other hand declare that you do [not] see it [as an offense]. Having on the one hand declared that you do [not] know about it, you on the other hand declare that you do [not] see it [as an offense]; and having on the one hand declared

that you do [not] see it [as an offense], you on the other hand declare that you do [not] know about it.” Ānanda, this is what is called settlement of litigation by [pronouncement of] <bad character>. This is how a certain kind of litigation is decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by [pronouncement of] bad character. Ānanda, what is settlement of litigation by circulating around? How is some litigation decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by circulating around? Ānanda, [suppose that] two bhikkhus have various dif ferences of opinion, and that this gives rise to disputation such as, “This is Dharma; this is not Dharma. This is discipline; this is not discipline. This is an offense; this is not an offense. This is a light [offense]; this is a grave [offense]. This can be talked about; this cannot be talked about. This can be restrained; this cannot be restrained. There is a remainder; there is no remainder. This can be atoned for; this cannot be atoned for.” Ānanda, those bhikkhus [can] settle this litigation in various ways. If it is settled in [those] various ways, then this litigation should be declared settled. If it is not settled in [those] various ways, then the sangha should be told about this litigation. If it is settled within the sangha, then this lit igation should be declared settled. If it is not settled within the sangha, then, Ānanda, if there are bhikkhus living nearby who have memorized the discourses, memorized the discipline, and memorized the summaries,^141 then these bhikkhus should together go to them and inform them about this litigation. If the dispute is settled on the way, then that litigation should be declared settled. If the dispute is not settled on the way, then they should again present this litigation to the sangha. If it is settled within the sangha, then this litigation should be declared settled. If it is [again] not settled within the sangha, then, Ānanda, if [there are] many companions who [can] help them, ones who have memorized the dis courses, memorized the discipline, and memorized the summaries, then, Ānanda, those [learned] bhikkhus should settle this litigation; [they should] instruct [the bhikkhus] by way of the Dharma and by way of the discipline, in accordance with the instructions of the respected Teacher, so that the encounter delights them. Ānanda, this is what is called settlement of litigation by circulating around. This is how a certain kind of litigation is decided through the so-called settlement of litigation by circulating around.

Ānanda, what is settlement of litigation that is like a broom for sweeping away excrement? How is some litigation decided through the so-called settlement of litigation that is like a broom for sweeping away excrement? Suppose that there is a dwelling place where the bhikkhus of the sangha are arguing bitterly, disputing acrimoniously with one another; and suppose, Ānanda, that those bhikkhus have become divided into two factions. Then, Ānanda, after they have divided into two factions, whichever monk in one of the factions is the most senior and most venerated, or the next below him in status, whoever is the leader, or the next below him in status, this monk, Ānanda, should address those [other] bhikkhus, saying, “Venerable friends, listen! We are being unprincipled and unreasonable; we are being evil and unskillful. Why is that? Having gone forth out of faith in this well-declared Dharma and discipline, having left home and become home- less to train in the path, here we are, arguing bitterly, disputing acrimo- niously with one another. “Venerable friends, given this disputation, [let] those of us who have been violating the precepts get rid of our grave offenses, get rid of our associations with the household life. On behalf of myself and on behalf of those venerable friends [who agree with me], I now address you ven- erable friends with the sincere intention of confessing this, of personally stating and revealing it, not daring to hide it. Henceforth I shall guard myself more skillfully so as not to do it again later.” Ānanda, if in this faction there is no monk who disagrees, then, Ānanda, this monk should approach the second faction. Having approached it, he should pay homage with his head at the feet of the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of them. Kneeling down and extending his hands with palms together, he should say to the monk who is the most senior and most venerated of them, “Venerable sirs, listen! We are being unprincipled and unreasonable; we are being evil and unskillful. Why is that? Having gone forth out of faith in this well-declared Dharma and dis- cipline, having left home and become homeless to train in the path, here we are arguing bitterly, disputing acrimoniously with one another. “Venerable friends, given this disputation, [let] those of us who have been violating the precepts get rid of our grave offenses, get rid of our associations with the household life. On behalf of myself and on behalf

of those venerable friends [who agree with me], I now address you ven- erable friends with the sincere intention of confessing it, of personally stating and revealing it, not daring to hide it. Henceforth I shall guard myself more skillfully so as not to do it again later.” Ānanda, that monk should say to this monk, “Venerable friend, do you yourself see your offense?” He should answer, “I myself truly see my offense.” That one should tell him, “Henceforth guard yourself more skillfully, so as not to do it again!” The same is then to be done by the second faction. Ānanda, this is the settlement that is like a broom for sweeping away excrement. This is how some litigation is decided through the so-called settlement of litigation that is like a broom for sweeping away excrement. Ānanda, I will now teach you six principles of cordiality. Listen closely, listen closely and pay proper attention! The venerable Ānanda replied, “Certainly. [We] shall listen to receive the instruction.” The Buddha said: What are the six? [One practices] bodily acts of loving-kindness toward one’s companions in the holy life. This principle is a principle of cordiality,^142 a principle of affection, a principle of joy, which makes for being liked, makes for being esteemed, makes for being respected, makes for being revered, makes for cultivation, makes for bringing together, for becoming a renunciant, for gaining mental unification, for gaining energy, for attaining nirvana. [One practices] verbal acts of loving-kindness.... [One practices] mental acts of loving-kindness.... Whatever benefits of the Dharma one has gained in accordance with the Dharma—the food that one has got oneself, even what is in one’s bowl— such benefits one shares with one’s companions in the holy life. This principle is a principle of cordiality, a principle of affection, a principle of joy, which makes for being liked, makes for being esteemed, makes for being respected, makes for being revered, makes for cultivation, makes for bringing together, for becoming a renunciant, for gaining mental unification, for gaining energy, for attaining nirvana.

Whatever moral conduct is not deficient, not defective, not defiled, not otherwise, [firm] like the earth, not swayed by others, praised by noble ones as adequate and well-maintained—such moral conduct one shares with one’s companions in the holy life. This principle is a principle of cordiality, a principle of affection, a principle of joy, which makes for being liked, makes for being esteemed, makes for being respected, makes for being revered, makes for cultivation, makes for bringing together, for becoming a renunciant, for gaining mental unification, for gaining energy, for attaining nirvana. Whatever noble view is emancipating, clear vision that penetrates pro- foundly, capable of rightly eradicating _dukkha_ —such view one shares with one’s companions in the holy life. This principle is a principle of cordiality, a principle of affection, a principle of joy, which makes for being liked, makes for being esteemed, makes for being respected, makes for being revered, makes for cultivation, makes for bringing together, for becoming a renunciant, for gaining mental unification, for gaining energy, for attaining nirvana. Ānanda, when I spoke earlier of six principles of cordiality, it was of these that I was speaking. Ānanda, if you [bhikkhus] settle and completely cut off these six roots of disputation, and use these seven kinds of settlement of litigation—[up to] the settlement of litigation that is like a broom for sweeping away excrement—to settle any dispute that arises in the sangha, and [if you] also practice these six principles of cordiality, then, Ānanda, in this way you will [dwell] together in harmony after I am gone: happy, free of dis- putation, united and of a single mind, united and with a single teaching, blending like water and milk, dwelling and practicing happily, just as when I was present.^143 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Ānanda and the [other] bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma196-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN103]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA196]]
> ◄  [[ma195-bdk]] 📜  [[ma197-bdk]] ►
