---
sutta_code: "MA20"
sutta_title:
  - "黑比丘 "
  - "Monk Kālaka"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA20]]
> ◄  [[ma19-bdk]] 📜  [[ma21-bdk]] ►

### 20. The Discourse to Pāṭaliya

Thus have I heard: At one time, the Buddha, who was wandering among the Koliyans together with a great company of bhikkhus, arrived at the village of Uttara and stayed in a rosewood grove north of Uttara. At that time Pāṭaliya, the village headman, heard that the renunciant Gotama, a son of the Sākya clan, who had abandoned his clan and family, and had gone forth to train in the path, was wandering among the Koliyans together with a great company of bhikkhus, and that he had arrived at the village of Uttara and was staying in a rosewood grove north of Uttara. [He also heard that] the renunciant Gotama had a great reputation, which had spread in all the ten directions: The renunciant Gotama is a Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a Well-gone One, a knower of the world, an unsurpassed one, a trainer of those to be tamed, a teacher of gods and human beings, known as the Buddha, the Fortunate One. In this world, with its gods, Māras, Brahmās, renunciants, and brahmins, from human beings to gods, he has [attained] understanding and awakening by himself, and dwells having personally realized it. The Dharma he teaches is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, revealing a holy life endowed with purity. If one visits such a Tathāgata, who is free from attachment and fully awakened, [if one] pays homage to him respectfully and serves him, then one will quickly get good rewards.

[Pāṭaliya] thought: “I should go to visit the renunciant Gotama and pay homage to him.” Having learned this, Pāṭaliya the village headman left Uttara and went north toward the rosewood grove, wishing to visit the World-honored One and pay homage to him. From afar Pāṭaliya the village headman saw the World-honored One among the trees of the grove, dignified and beautiful, like the moon amidst the stars, with radiant aura, shining like a golden moun- tain, endowed with handsome appearance and majestic dignity, with sense faculties calm, free of obstruction, accomplished and disciplined, with his mind calm and quiet. Having seen the Buddha from afar, Pāṭaliya the village headman approached the Buddha, exchanged greetings, sat down to one side, and said to the World-honored One:

I have heard this: “The renunciant Gotama knows magic, he is a magi cian.” Gotama, those who say: “The renunciant Gotama knows magic, he is a magician,” are they not misrepresenting the renunciant Gotama? Do they speak what is true? Do they speak what is Dharma? Do they speak the Dharma according to the Dharma? Do they not fall into error and incur censure according to the Dharma? The World-honored One replied: Headman, those who say: “The renunciant Gotama knows magic, he is a magician,”^91 they are not misrepresenting the renunciant Gotama. They speak what is true. They speak what is Dharma. They speak the Dharma according to the Dharma. They do not fall into error or incur censure according to the Dharma. Why? Because, headman, I know the magic of others, though I myself am not a magician. Pāṭaliya said: Although what those renunciants and brahmins were saying is true, yet I did not believe them when they said: “The renunciant Gotama knows magic, he is a magician.”

The World-honored One said: “Headman, if one knows magic, does one thereby become a magician?” Pāṭaliya replied: “Indeed, World-honored One. Indeed, Well-gone One.” The World-honored One said: Headman, do not make a mistake and misrepresent me. If you misrep resent me, then you harm yourself, you will be criticized, you commit an offense, and you will be condemned by the noble ones for having perpetrated a major fault. Why? Because the truth is not in accordance with what you say. Headman, have you heard that the Koliyans have soldiers? [Pāṭaliya] replied: “Yes, I have heard that.” [The Buddha:] “What do you think, headman? Why do the Koliyans employ soldiers?” [Pāṭaliya] replied: “To kill bandits, Gotama. For this reason the Koliyans employ soldiers.” [The Buddha:] “What do you think, headman? Are the Koliyan soldiers virtuous or without virtue?” [Pāṭaliya] replied: Gotama, if in the world there are those who lack virtue, the Koliyan soldiers are certainly among them. Why? The Koliyan soldiers break all the precepts and behave in evil ways. [The Buddha] asked further: Headman, you see it thus and know it thus, and I do not question it. [But] suppose that someone else were to ask you: “Headman Pāṭaliya, you know that the Koliyan soldiers break all the precepts and do only evil; therefore, headman Pāṭaliya, you too break all the precepts and do only evil.” If someone were to speak like this, would he be speaking the truth? [Pāṭaliya] replied: No, Gotama. And why? The views of the Koliyan soldiers are different [from mine], their desires are different, their aspirations are different.

The Koliyan soldiers break all the precepts and do only evil, but I keep all the precepts and do no evil. [The Buddha] asked further: Headman, you know that the Koliyan soldiers break all the precepts and do only evil, but you do not for this reason become one who breaks the precepts and does only evil. Why, then, should it not be the case that the Tathāgata knows magic but is not himself a magician? How is that? I know magic, I know magicians, I know the results of doing magic, and I know the elimination of magic. Headman, I also know killing of living beings, I know killers of living beings, I know the results of killing living beings, and I know the elimination of killing living beings. Headman, I know taking what is not given, I know those who take what is not given, I know the results of taking what is not given, and I know the elimination of taking what is not given. Headman, I know speaking falsehood, I know those who speak falsehood, I know the results of speaking falsehood, and I know the elimination of speaking falsehood. Headman, I know this and see this. If someone says, “The renun- ciant Gotama knows magic, he is a magician,” and if he does not give up saying that but makes known that state of mind, that desire, that aspiration, that report, that memory, and that reflection, then, when his life ends he shall, as quickly as one might bend or stretch out one’s arm, be reborn in hell. On hearing this, Pāṭaliya the village headman was greatly afraid, trem- bling, with his body hair standing on end. He immediately got up from his seat, paid homage at the [Buddha’s] feet with his head and, kneeling down with his palms placed together [in respect], said to the World-honored One:

I repent, Gotama. I confess, Well-gone One. I was like a fool, like an ignorant person, like an unstable person, like an unwholesome person. And why? I was wrong in saying that the renunciant Gotama is a magi cian. May Gotama accept my repentance! I have seen my fault and dis closed it. Having repented, I shall exercise restraint and not do it again.

The World-honored One told him: So it is, headman. You truly were like a fool, ignorant, unstable and unwholesome. And why? You were wrong in saying that the Tathāgata, who is free from attachment and fully awakened, is a magician. How- ever, you have been able to repent. You have seen your fault and dis- closed it. Exercising restraint, you will not do it again. In this way, headman, those who are able to repent, who see their faults and disclose them, and who exercise restraint so as not to do it again, will grow in the noble Dharma and be free from fault. Thereupon Pāṭaliya the village headman, his palms placed together [in respect] toward the Buddha, said to the World-honored One:

Gotama, there is one [type of] renunciants and brahmins who hold this view and declare: “If someone kills living beings, they will get the entire result in this lifetime; and because of that, sorrow and suf fering will arise. If someone takes what is not given, or speaks false hood, they will get the entire result in this lifetime; and because of that, sorrow and suffering will arise.” Renunciant Gotama, what do you think [of this]? The World-honored One said: Headman, I shall now ask you something; answer according to your understanding. What do you think, headman? In a village there may be a man who has garlands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertain ment; and he is presented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king. Then someone asks: “What has this man done, that he now has garlands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; that singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertainment; and that he is presented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king?” Someone replies: “This man killed an enemy of the king, and the king, being delighted, bestowed rewards on him. For this reason this man has garlands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertainment; and he is presented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king.”

Headman, have you ever seen something like this, or heard of something like this? [Pāṭaliya] replied: “Yes, Gotama, I have seen it, I have heard of it, and I [expect I] will hear of it [again].” [The Buddha continued:] Headman, one may also see that a criminal is arrested by the king, his hands are bound behind him and, with a drum being beaten and the [sentence] proclaimed, he is taken out through the southern gate of the town, seated beneath a tall signpost, beheaded, and his head is put on display. Then someone asks: “What crime has this man committed that he is executed by the king?” Someone replies: “This man wrongly killed an innocent person from the king’s household. For this reason the king ordered this punishment.” Headman, have you ever seen something like this, or heard of something like this? [Pāṭaliya] replied: “Yes, Gotama, I have seen it, I have heard of it, and I [expect I] will hear of it [again].” [The Buddha said:] Headman, if a renunciant or brahmin holds this view and makes this proclamation: “If someone kills living beings, they will get the entire result in this lifetime; and because of that, sorrow and suffering will arise,” are they saying what is true or are they saying what is false? [Pāṭaliya] replied: “It is falsely said, Gotama.” [The Buddha:] “If they say what is false, would you have faith in them?” [Pāṭaliya] replied: “No, I would not have faith, Gotama.” The World-honored One praised him, saying: “Very good, headman! Very good!” [The Buddha] asked further: What do you think, headman? In a village there may be a man who has garlands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertainment; and he is presented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king.

Then someone asks: “What has this man done, that he now has garlands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; that singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertainment; and that he is presented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king?” Someone replies: “In another country this man took what was not given [and the king, being pleased with him, bestowed rewards on him.] For this reason this man has garlands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertainment; and he is presented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king.” Headman, have you ever seen something like this, or heard of something like this? [Pāṭaliya] replied: “Yes, Gotama, I have seen it, I have heard of it, and I [expect I] will hear of it [again].” [The Buddha continued:] Again, headman, one may also see that a criminal is arrested by the king, his hands are bound behind him and, with a drum being beaten and [the sentence] proclaimed, he is taken out through the southern gate of the town, seated beneath a tall signpost, beheaded, and his head is put on display. Then someone asks: “What crime has this man committed that he is executed by the king?” Someone replies: “Within the king’s country this man took what was not given. For this reason the king ordered this punishment.” Headman, have you ever seen something like this, or heard of something like this? [Pāṭaliya] replied: “Yes, Gotama, I have seen it, I have heard of it, and I [expect I] will hear of it [again].” [The Buddha:] Headman, if a renunciant or brahmin holds this view and makes this proclamation: “If someone takes what is not given, they will get the entire result in this lifetime; and because of that, sorrow and suffering will arise,” are they saying what is true or are they saying what is false? [Pāṭaliya] replied: “It is falsely said, Gotama.”

[The Buddha:] “If they say what is false, would you have faith in them?” [Pāṭaliya] replied: “No, I would not have faith, Gotama.” The World-honored One praised him saying: Very good, headman! Very good! What do you think, headman? In a village there may be a man who has garlands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertainment; and he is presented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king. Then someone asks: “What has this man done, that he now has garlands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; that singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertainment; and that he is presented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king?” Someone replies: “This man is a singer,^92 able to entertain and amuse. He delighted the king with false speech and the king, being delighted, bestowed rewards on him. For this reason this man has gar- lands on his head and various perfumes applied to his body; singing, music, and dancing are performed for his entertainment; and he is pre- sented with courtesans to enjoy himself like a king.” Headman, have you ever seen something like this, or heard of something like this? [Pāṭaliya] replied: “Yes, Gotama, I have seen it, I have heard of it, and I [expect I] will hear of it [again].” [The Buddha:] Again, headman, one may also see that a criminal is arrested by the king, his hands are bound behind him and, with a drum being beaten and [the sentence] proclaimed, he is taken out through the southern gate of the town, seated beneath a tall signpost, beheaded, and his head is put on display. Then someone asks: “What crime has this man com- mitted that he is executed by the king?” Someone replies: “This man lied in testimony before the king. With lies he tried to deceive the king. For this reason the king ordered this punishment.” Headman, have you ever seen something like this, or heard of something like this?

He replied: “Yes, Gotama, I have seen it, I have heard of it, and I [expect I] will hear of it [again].” [The Buddha:] Headman, what do you think—if a renunciant or brahmin holds this view and makes this proclamation: “If someone kills living beings, they will get the entire result in this lifetime; and because of that, sorrow and suffering will arise,” are they saying what is true or are they saying what is false? He replied: “It is falsely said, Gotama.” “If they say what is false, would you have faith in them?” He replied: “No, I would not have faith, Gotama.” The World-honored One praised him, saying: “Very good, headman! Very good!” Then Pāṭaliya, the village headman, rose from his seat, arranged his clothes so as to bare one shoulder and, placing his palms together [in respect] towards the Buddha, said to the World-honored One:

Marvelous! What Gotama has said is wonderful, with good analogies and good proof. Gotama, I built a high-roofed hall in the village of Uttara, provided it with seats and beds, and set up water pots and big bright lamps. If diligent renunciants or brahmins come to stay in this high roofed hall, I provide what they need in accordance with my ability. [Once] four teachers, holding different and opposing views were gathered in the high-roofed hall. Among them was one teacher who held this view and made this proclamation: There is no offering, no sacrifice,^93 there are no incantations; no wholesome or unwholesome actions, no results of wholesome or unwholesome actions; there is neither this world nor another world, there are no father and mother; there are no True Persons in the world who are headed for a supreme attainment, who are well gone and well directed, who have themselves known and realized this world and the other world, who have themselves directly real ized and accomplished it and dwell therein.

The second teacher had right view. Opposing the view and knowledge of the first teacher, he held this view and made this proclamation:

There is offering, there is sacrifice, and there are incantations; there are wholesome and unwholesome actions, and results of wholesome and unwholesome actions; there is this world and the other world, there are father and mother; there are True Persons in the world who are headed for a supreme attainment, who are well gone and well directed, who have themselves known and realized this world and the other world, who have themselves directly realized and accomplished it and dwell therein.

The third teacher held this view and made this proclamation:

One who acts or instructs another to act; one who destroys or instructs another to destroy; one who tortures or instructs another to torture, [causing] distress, vexation, sadness, beating of breasts, despair, weeping, and bewilderment; one who kills living beings, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsehood, drinks intoxicating liquor, breaks through walls to open storehouses, intrudes into others’ territory, destroys villages and towns, wipes out cities and countries—one who acts in these ways is not doing any evil. Again, if by using an iron wheel as sharp as a razor, one were, in a single day, to cut into parts and kill all the living beings on this earth, slicing them into pieces and turning them all into a single heap of flesh; this does not amout to “evil actions,” and the evil actions will not have results. If one were to go along the south ern bank of the Ganges killing, destroying, and torturing, and to come back along the northern bank of the Ganges making offerings, undertaking sacrifices, and chanting incantations; then there is no offense and no merit because of this, there are no results of offense or merit because of this. Making offerings, taming [oneself], guarding [oneself], restraining [oneself], by esteeming, benefiting, generosity, speaking pleasantly, doing good, and sharing profit, one does not [earn] merit because of this, there is no result of merit because of this.

The fourth teacher had right view. Opposing the understanding and view of the third teacher, he held this view and made this proclamation: One who acts or instructs another to act; one who destroys or instructs another to destroy; one who tortures or instructs another to torture, [causing] distress, vexation, and sadness, beating of breasts, despair, weeping, and bewilderment; one who kills living beings, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsehood, drinks intoxicating liquor, breaks through walls to open storehouses, intrudes into others’ territory, destroys villages and towns, wipes out cities and countries—one who acts in these ways is doing evil. Again, if by using an iron wheel as sharp as a razor, one were, in a single day, to cut into parts and kill all the living beings on this earth, slicing them into pieces and turning them all into a single heap of flesh, this does amount to “evil actions,” and these evil actions will have results. If one were to go along the southern bank of the Ganges killing, destroying, and torturing, and to come back along the northern bank of the Ganges making offerings, undertaking sacrifices, and chanting incantations; then there is offense or merit because of this, there are results of offense or merit because of this. Making offerings, taming [oneself], guarding [oneself], restraining [oneself], by esteeming, benefiting, generosity, speaking pleasantly, doing good and sharing profit, there is merit because of this, there is result of merit because of this. Gotama, having heard this, I have come to doubt. Of these renunciants and brahmins, who is speaking the truth, and who is speaking falsehood? The World-honored One told him: Headman, do not let doubt arise in you. Why not? Owing to doubt, hes itation arises. Headman, you yourself do not have pure knowledge about whether there is a next life or no next life. Also, headman, you do not have pure knowledge regarding which way of acting is evil and which way of acting is wholesome. Headman, there is a Dharma meditation

called abandoning. Through this meditation you may attain right mind- fulness, you may attain one-pointedness of mind. In this way you may cut off your doubt in this lifetime and achieve progress. Thereupon, Pāṭaliya the village headman rose again from his seat, arranged his clothes so as to bare one shoulder and, placing his palms together [in respect] towards the Buddha, said to the World-honored One:

Gotama, what is the Dharma meditation called abandoning, through which I may attain right mindfulness and may attain one-pointedness of mind, and in that way may cut off my doubt in this lifetime and achieve progress? The World-honored One told him: Headman, a learned noble disciple refrains from killing and abandons killing, abandons taking what is not given... sexual misconduct... false speech... (and so on up to) abandons wrong view and attains right view. During the daytime he instructs people to farm and cultivate the fields, and when evening comes, he rests from this and goes indoors to meditate. When the night is over, at dawn, he thinks: I have refrained from killing and have abandoned killing, I have abandoned taking what is not given... sexual misconduct... false speech... (and so on up to) abandoned wrong view and attained right view. Then he examines himself: “I have abandoned the ten unwholesome courses of action, and have been mindful of the ten wholesome courses of action.” When he sees these ten unwholesome courses of action abandoned within himself and is mindful of the ten wholesome courses of action, joy arises in him; joy having arisen, rapture arises; rapture having arisen, the body becomes calm; the body having become calm, he experiences happiness with the body; the body having experienced happiness, he attains one-pointedness of mind. Headman, a learned noble disciple who has attained one-pointed ness of mind, imbues his mind with loving-kindness and dwells [men tally] pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the

fourth direction, also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. Then he reflects thus: “There are renunciants and brahmins who hold this view and make this proclamation:” There is no offering, no sacrifice, there are no incantations; no wholesome or unwholesome actions, no results of wholesome or unwholesome actions; there is neither this world nor another world, there are no father and mother; there are no True Persons in the world who are headed for a supreme attainment, who are well gone and well directed, who have known and realized for them selves this world and the other world, who have themselves directly realized and accomplished it and dwell therein. If those renunciants and brahmins are speaking the truth, then I have offended against neither the fearful nor the fearless in the world. I have always had compassion and empathy for the entire world. Toward [all] beings my mind has been free of contention, untainted, and delighted. Now I have attained the Dharma of the unsurpassable person (i.e., the Buddha),^94 attained progress and a happy abiding; this is called the Dharma meditation of abandoning. What these renun ciants and brahmins say may be correct or incorrect; but [whether] it is correct or incorrect, I have attained inner tranquility of mind. Headman, this is the Dharma meditation called abandoning. Through this meditation you may attain right mindfulness, you may attain one pointedness of mind. In this way you may cut off your doubt in this lifetime and achieve progress. Again, headman, a learned noble disciple refrains from killing and abandons killing, abandons taking what is not given... sexual mis conduct... false speech... (and so on up to) abandons wrong view and attains right view. During the daytime he instructs people to farm and cultivate the fields, and when evening comes, he rests from this

and goes indoors to meditate. When the night is over, at dawn, he thinks:

I have refrained from killing and have abandoned killing, I have abandoned taking what is not given... sexual misconduct... false speech... (and so on up to) abandoned wrong view and attained right view.

Then he examines himself: “I have abandoned the ten unwholesome courses of action and have been mindful of the ten wholesome courses of action.” When he sees these ten unwholesome courses of action abandoned within himself and is mindful of the ten wholesome courses of action, joy arises in him; joy having arisen, rapture arises; rapture having arisen, the body becomes calm; the body having become calm, he experiences happiness with the body; the body having experienced happiness, he attains one-pointedness of mind. Headman, a learned noble disciple who has attained one-pointed- ness of mind imbues his mind with compassion, and dwells [mentally] pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with compassion, free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwells per- vading the entire world [with a mind] boundless, exalted, immeasurable and well cultivated. Then he reflects thus: There are renunciants and brahmins who hold this view and make this proclamation: There is offering, there is sacrifice, there are incantations; there are wholesome or unwholesome actions, and results of wholesome or unwholesome actions; there is both this world and the other world, there are father and mother; there are True Persons in the world who are headed for a supreme attainment, who are well gone and well directed, who have known and realized for themselves this world and the other world, who have themselves directly realized and accomplished it and dwell therein. If those renunciants and brahmins are speaking the truth, then I have offended against neither the fearful nor the fearless in the

world. I have always had compassion and empathy for the entire world. Toward [all] beings my mind has been free of contention, untainted, and delighted. Now I have attained the Dharma of the unsurpassable person, attained progress and a happy abiding; this is called the Dharma meditation of abandoning. What these renun ciants and brahmins say may be correct or incorrect; but [whether] it is correct or incorrect, I have attained inner tranquility of mind. Headman, this is the Dharma meditation called abandoning. Through this meditation you may attain right mindfulness, you may attain one pointedness of mind. In this way you may cut off your doubt in this lifetime and achieve progress. Again, headman, a learned noble disciple refrains from killing and abandons killing, abandons taking what is not given... sexual miscon duct... false speech... (and so on up to) abandons wrong view and attains right view. During the daytime he instructs people to farm and cultivate the fields and, when evening comes, he rests from this and goes indoors to meditate. When the night is over, at dawn, he thinks: I refrained from killing and have abandoned killing, I have aban doned taking what is not given... sexual misconduct... false speech... (and so on up to) abandoned wrong view and attained right view. Then he examines himself: “I have abandoned the ten unwholesome courses of action, and have been mindful of the ten wholesome courses of action.” When he sees these ten unwholesome courses of action abandoned within himself and is mindful of the ten wholesome courses of action, joy arises in him; joy having arisen, rapture arises; rapture having arisen, the body becomes calm; the body having become calm, he experiences happiness with the body; the body having experienced happiness, he attains one-pointedness of mind. Headman, a learned noble disciple who has attained one-pointed ness of mind, imbues his mind with empathic joy and dwells [mentally] pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all

around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with empathic joy, free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable and well cultivated. Then he reflects thus: There are renunciants and brahmins who hold this view and make this proclamation: One who acts or instructs another to act; one who destroys or instructs another to destroy; one who tortures or instructs another to torture, [causing] distress, vexation, sadness, beating of breasts, despair, weeping, and bewilderment; one who kills living beings, takes what is not given, engages in sexual mis- conduct, speaks falsehood, drinks intoxicating liquor, breaks through walls to open storehouses, intrudes into others’ territory, destroys villages and towns, wipes out cities and countries—one who acts in these ways is not doing any evil. Again, if by using an iron wheel as sharp as a razor, one were, in a single day, to cut into parts and kill all the living beings on this earth, slicing them into pieces and turning them all into a single heap of flesh; there is no evil karma because of this, there is no result of evil karma because of this. If one were to go along the southern bank of the Ganges killing, destroying, and torturing, and to come back along the northern bank of the Ganges making offerings, undertaking sacrifices, and chanting incantations; then there is no offense and no merit because of this, there are no results of offense or merit because of this. Making offerings, taming [one- self], guarding [oneself], restraining [oneself], by esteeming, ben- efiting, generosity, speaking pleasantly, doing good, and sharing profit, there is no merit because of this, there is no result of merit because of this. If those renunciants and brahmins are speaking the truth, then I have offended against neither the fearful nor the fearless in the world. I have always had compassion and empathy for the entire world. Toward [all] beings my mind has been free of contention, untainted, and delighted. Now I have attained the Dharma of the

unsurpassable person, attained progress and a happy abiding; this is called the Dharma meditation of abandoning. What these renun ciants and brahmins say may be correct or incorrect; but [whether] it is correct or incorrect, I have attained inner tranquility of mind. Headman, this is the Dharma meditation called abandoning. Through this meditation you may attain right mindfulness, you may attain one pointedness of mind. In this way you may cut off your doubt in this lifetime and achieve progress. Again, headman, a learned noble disciple refrains from killing and abandons killing, abandons taking what is not given... sexual mis conduct... false speech... (and so on up to) abandons wrong view and attains right view. During the daytime he instructs people to farm and cultivate the fields, and when evening comes, he rests from this and goes indoors to meditate. When the night is over, at dawn, he thinks: I have refrained from killing and have abandoned killing, I have abandoned taking what is not given... sexual misconduct... false speech... (and so on up to) abandoned wrong view and attained right view. Then he examines himself: “I have abandoned the ten unwholesome courses of action, and have been mindful of the ten wholesome courses of action.” When he sees these ten unwholesome courses of action abandoned within himself, and is mindful of the ten wholesome courses of action, joy arises in him; joy having arisen, rapture arises; rapture having arisen, the body becomes calm; the body having become calm, he experiences happiness with the body; the body having experienced happiness, he attains one-pointedness of mind. Headman, a learned noble disciple who has attained one-pointed ness of mind, imbues his mind with equanimity and dwells [mentally] pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with equanimity, free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwells pervading

the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable and well cultivated. Then he reflects thus: There are renunciants and brahmins who hold this view and make this proclamation: One who acts or instructs another to act; one who destroys or instructs another to destroy; one who tortures or instructs another to torture, [causing] distress, vexation, and sad- ness, beating of breasts, despair, weeping, and bewilderment; one who kills living beings, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsehood, drinks intoxicating liquor, breaks through walls to open storehouses, intrudes into others’ territory, destroys villages and towns, wipes out cities and countries—one who acts in these ways is doing evil. Again, if by using an iron wheel as sharp as a razor, one were, in a single day, to cut into parts and kill all the living beings on this earth, slicing them into pieces and turning them all into a single heap of flesh, there is evil karma because of this, there is result of evil karma because of this. If one were to go along the southern bank of the Ganges killing, destroying, and torturing, and to come back along the northern bank of the Ganges making offerings, undertaking sacrifices, and chanting incantations; then there is offense or merit because of this, there are results of offense or merit because of this. Making offerings, taming [oneself], guard- ing [oneself], restraining [oneself], by esteeming, benefiting, gen- erosity, speaking pleasantly, doing good, and sharing profit, there is merit because of this, there is result of merit because of this. If those renunciants and brahmins are speaking the truth, then I have offended against neither the fearful nor the fearless in the world. I have always had compassion and empathy for the entire world. Toward [all] beings my mind has been free of con- tention, untainted, and delighted. Now I have attained the Dharma of the unsurpassable person, attained progress and a happy abiding; this is called the Dharma meditation of abandoning. What these renunciants and brahmins say may be correct or incorrect; but

[whether] it is correct or incorrect, I have attained inner tranquility of mind. Headman, this is the Dharma meditation called abandoning. Through this meditation you may attain right mindfulness, you may attain one pointedness of mind. In this way you may cut off your doubt in this lifetime and achieve progress. As this Dharma was being taught, the spotless and immaculate Dharma eye in regard to all phenomena arose in Pāṭaliya the village headman. Pāṭaliya the village headman saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the bright and pure Dharma; he cut off doubt and went beyond perplexity; he became independent of other teachers; he would never again follow others; and he became free of hesitation. Having been established in the attainment of the fruit, he had attained fearlessness in the Dharma taught by the World-honored One. He rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the feet of the Buddha, and said: World-honored one, I now go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of bhikkhus. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay follower! From this day forth until life ends I go [to him] for refuge. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the village headman Pāṭaliya and the bhikkhus were delighted and remembered them well.

## Division 3 Sāriputta


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma20-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN8.29]], [[MA124]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA20]]
> ◄  [[ma19-bdk]] 📜  [[ma21-bdk]] ►
