---
sutta_code: "MA200"
sutta_title:
  - "住法 "
  - "Maintaining [Wholesome] States"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA200]]
> ◄  [[ma199-bdk]] 📜  [[ma201-bdk]] ►

### 200. The Discourse on [the Monk] Ariṭṭha

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the monk Ariṭṭha, a former vulture killer, had given rise to this evil view: “As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, there is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality.” On hearing this, the bhikkhus approached the monk Ariṭṭha and asked him, “Ariṭṭha, is it true that you say this: ‘As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, there is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality’?” Then Ariṭṭha replied, “Venerable ones, it is true that, as I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, there is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality.” The bhikkhus reprimanded Ariṭṭha, saying: You, should not say this! Do not misrepresent the World-honored One! It is not good to misrepresent the World-honored One. The World-honored One does not say this. Ariṭṭha, there is obstruction in sensuality. The World- honored One has with countless skillful means spoken of the obstruction in sensuality.^173 Ariṭṭha, you should quickly give up this evil view. [Despite] being reprimanded by the bhikkhus, the monk Ariṭṭha held on strongly to this evil view and one-sidedly stated, “This is true. Anything else is false.” [The exchange] went like this three times. Being unable to get the monk Ariṭṭha to give up this evil view, those many bhikkhus rose from their seats and left. They approached the Buddha, paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. They said:

World-honored One, the monk Ariṭṭha has given rise to this evil view:

“As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, there is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality.” World-honored One, on hearing this, we approached the monk Ariṭṭha and asked him, “Ariṭṭha, is it true that you say this: ‘As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, there is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality’?” The monk Ariṭṭha answered us, saying, “Venerable ones, it is true that, as I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, there is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality.” World-honored One, we reprimanded him, saying, “Ariṭṭha, you should not say this! Do not misrepresent the World-honored One! It is not good to misrepresent the World-honored One. The World-honored One does not say this. Ariṭṭha, there is obstruction in sensuality. The World-honored One has with countless skillful means spoken of the obstruction in sen suality. Ariṭṭha, you should quickly give up this evil view.” [Despite] being reprimanded by us, he held on strongly to this evil view and one-sidedly stated, “This is true; anything else is false.” [The exchange] went like this three times. Being unable to get the monk Ariṭṭha to give up this evil view, we rose from our seats and left. On hearing this, the World-honored One told one monk, “Approach the monk Ariṭṭha and say this: ‘The World-honored One summons you.’” Then [that] one monk, having received the instruction from the World honored One, rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. Approaching the monk Ariṭṭha, he said to him, “The World-honored One summons you.” The monk Ariṭṭha approached the Buddha, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. The World-honored One asked him, “Ariṭṭha, is it true that you say this: ‘As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, there is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality’?” Ariṭṭha replied, “World-honored One, it is true that, as I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, there is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality.” The World-honored One reprimanded him, saying:

Ariṭṭha, how is it that you understand the Dharma taught by me in this way? From whose mouth have you heard that I teach the Dharma in this way? You foolish man! How is it that you say one-sidedly what I have not said one-sidedly? You foolish man! On hearing the reprimand by all the bhikkhus, you should then have answered according to the Dharma. I shall now ask the bhikkhus about this. Then the World-honored One asked the bhikkhus, “Do you too similarly understand the Dharma taught by me in this way: ‘There is no obstruction in engaging in sensuality’?” Then the bhikkhus replied, “We do not.” The World-honored One asked them, “How do you understand the Dharma taught by me?” The bhikkhus replied: We understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One in this way: “There is obstruction in sensuality.” The World-honored One has taught that sensuality is an obstruction. Sensuality is like a skeleton; the World-honored One has taught that sen- suality is like a skeleton. Sensuality is like a piece of meat; the World-honored One has taught that sensuality is like a piece of meat. Sensuality is like a torch; the World-honored One has taught that sensuality is like a torch. Sensuality is like a fiery pit; the World-honored One has taught that sen- suality is like a fiery pit. Sensuality is like a poisonous snake; the World- honored One has taught that sensuality is like a poisonous snake. Sensuality is like a dream; the World-honored One has taught that sensuality is like a dream. Sensuality is like borrowed goods; the World-honored One has taught that sensuality is like borrowed goods. Sensuality is like fruit on a tree; the World-honored One has taught that sensuality is like fruit on a tree.^174 In this way we understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One. The World-honored One praised them, saying: It is well, it is well, bhikkhus, that you understand me to have taught the Dharma in this way. Why is that? I do indeed say that there is obstruction in sensuality; I teach that sen- suality is an obstruction. Sensuality is like a skeleton; I teach that sensuality

is like a skeleton. Sensuality is like a piece of meat; I teach that sensuality is like a piece of meat. Sensuality is like a torch; I teach that sensuality is like a torch. Sensuality is like a fiery pit; I teach that sensuality is like a fiery pit. Sensuality is like a poisonous snake; I teach that sensuality is like a poi sonous snake. Sensuality is like a dream; I teach that sensuality is like a dream. Sensuality is like borrowed goods; I teach that sensuality is like borrowed goods. Sensuality is like fruit on a tree; I teach that sensuality is like fruit on a tree. The World-honored One praised them, saying: It is well, it is well, that you understand me to have taught the Dharma in this way.^175 But this fool Ariṭṭha has a confused grasp of both the meaning and the phrasing [of it]. Because he has his own confused grasp of it, he misrepresents me and harms himself. He commits a transgression and an offense. He is doing a disfavor to his wise companions in the holy life, and has committed a serious offense. You foolish man! Do you understand this evil and unwholesome situation?^176 Then the monk Ariṭṭha, having been rebuked to his face by the World honored One, felt sad and distressed. He hung his head in silence, unable to reply, as if immersed in thought. Then the World-honored One, having rebuked the monk Ariṭṭha to his face, said to the bhikkhus: If you completely understand the meaning of the teachings taught by me, then you should remember them in this way. If you do not completely understand the meaning of the teachings taught by me, then you should ask me or your wise companions in the holy life. Why is that? [It is because] there may be a fool with a confused grasp of the meaning and phrasing [of the teachings] who, because of his own confused grasp, has such and such an understanding of those teachings, that is, of the discourses ( sutta ), stanzas ( geyya ), expositions ( veyyākaraṇa ), verses ( gāthā ), causes ( nidāna ), inspired utterances ( udāna ), heroic tales ( apadāna ), [what has been] “thus said” ( itivuttaka ), birth stories ( jātaka ), answers to questions ( ve dalla ), marvels ( abbhutadhamma ), and explanations of meaning ( upadesa ).^177

He argues, [claiming] that he understands their meaning. Without having grasped them, he says that he has understood their meaning.^178 His professed understanding of these teachings does not get at their meaning. Instead he experiences much suffering and tires himself for nothing. Why is that? It is because of his confused grasp of the teachings. He is like a man who, wishing to catch a snake, goes in search of a snake. As he searches for a snake while walking in the jungle, he sees a very big snake. Then, [approaching it] from the front, he grasps its middle part with his hands. The snake turns around, raises its head, and bites his hands, feet, and other limbs. That man is unable to get the snake for the sake of which he went searching; he does not get that benefit. Instead he experiences extreme suffering and tires himself for nothing. Why is that? It is because he does not properly understand the method for grasping snakes. In the same way there may be a fool with a confused grasp of the mean- ing and phrasing [of the teachings] who, because of his own confused grasp, has such and such an understanding of those teachings, that is, of the discourses, stanzas, expositions, verses, causes, inspired utterances, heroic tales, [what has been] “thus said,” birth stories, answers to questions, marvels, and explanations of meaning. He argues, [claiming] that he understands their meaning. Without having grasped them, he says that he has understood their meaning. His professed understanding of these teachings does not get at their meaning. Instead he experiences extreme suffering and tires himself for nothing. Why is that? It is because of his confused grasp of the teachings. There may [however], be a clansman who is not confused and has a good grasp of the meaning and phrasing [of the teachings] who, because he is not confused and has a good grasp of them, has such and such an under- standing of the teachings, that is, of discourses, stanzas, expositions, verses, causes, inspired utterances, heroic tales, [what has been] “thus said,” birth stories, answers to questions, marvels, and explanations of meaning. He does not argue, [not claiming] that he understands their meaning. Only after having grasped them does he say that he has understood their meaning. His professed understanding of these teachings gets at their meaning. He does not experience extreme suffering and also does not tire himself. Why is that? It is because he does not have a confused grasp of the teachings.

He is like a man who, wishing to catch a snake, goes in search of a snake. While he is searching for a snake, holding an iron staff and walking in the jungle, he sees a very big snake. He first holds down the snake’s head with the iron staff, then he grasps its head with his hand. Although that snake opposes him and coils its tail around his hands, feet, and other limbs, it cannot bite him. That man is able to catch the snake for the sake of which he went searching. He achieves this purpose, does not experience extreme suffering, and also does not tire himself. Why is that? It is because he properly understands the method for grasping snakes. In the same way, there may be a clansman who is not confused and has a good grasp of the meaning and the phrasing [of the teachings] who, because he is not confused and has a good grasp of them, has such and such an understanding of the teachings, that is, of the discourses, stanzas, expositions, verses, causes, inspired utterances, heroic tales, [what has been] “thus said,” birth stories, answers to questions, marvels, and explanations of meaning. He does not argue [claiming] that he understands their meaning. Only after having grasped them does he say that he has understood their meaning. His professed understanding of these teachings gets at their meaning. He does not experience extreme suffering and also does not tire himself. Why is that? It is because he does not have a confused grasp of the teachings. I have long taught you the teachings as resembling a raft, wanting you to give them up, not wanting you to cling to them. Why have I long taught you the teachings as resembling a raft, wanting you to give them up, not wanting you to cling to them? It is just as if there were a mountain river, very deep and extremely wide, a long stream with a swift current, and with much material floating in it, also with no ferry boat and no bridge. Suppose a man comes along who has a matter to attend to on the other bank and wants to cross over. As he is seeking [a means] to cross over, he thinks, “Now, this mountain river is very deep and extremely wide, a long stream with a swift current, and with much material floating in it, also with no ferry boat and no bridge. I have a matter to attend to on the other bank and want to cross over. By what skillful means can I safely reach the other bank?” He further thinks, “Let me now gather grass and sticks on this bank, bind them together into a raft, and having boarded it, cross over.”

So he gathers grass and sticks on the [near] bank, binds them together into a raft and, having boarded it, crosses over. Having safely arrived there, he thinks, “Now, this raft has been of much benefit to me. Boarding this raft has enabled me to cross over safely from that bank to this bank. Let me now, putting it on my right shoulder or on my head, carry it along as I go.” He then puts the raft on his right shoulder or on his head to carry it along as he goes. What do you think? With such an idea,^179 would he derive benefit from doing this with the raft? Then the bhikkhus replied, “He could not.” The World-honored One said: Doing what with the raft could that man derive benefit? The man thinks [again], “Now, I have derived much benefit from this raft. Boarding this raft has enabled me to cross over safely from that bank to this bank. Should I now rather put this raft back in the water or put it on the bank, abandon it there, and go?” So the man puts the raft back in the water or puts it on the bank, abandons it there, and goes. What do you think? Would he derive benefit from doing this with the raft? Then the bhikkhus replied, “He benefits.” The World-honored One said: In the same way, I have long taught you the teachings as resembling a raft, wanting you to [be prepared to] let go of them, not wanting you to cling to them. If you understand that I have long taught you the teachings as resembling a raft, then you should [be prepared to] let go of these teach- ings; how much more so [should you let go of] whatever is contrary to these teachings. Again, there are six occasions for views.^180 What are the six? Whatever bodily form, past, future, or present, internal or external, subtle or gross, sublime or not sublime, near or far—all of that does not belong to me; I am not that; and it is not my self. Wisely contemplating in this way, a monk knows it as it really is. Whatever feeling... whatever perception... [whatever forma- tions]^181... whatever view that “That does not belong to me, I am not

that, I shall not exist, I shall not possess [anything]”—all of that does not belong to me, I do not belong to that, and it is not my self.^182 Wisely con templating in this way, he knows it as it really is. Whatever view, what is seen, heard, cognized, and known, what is obtained, what is observed, what is reflected on by the mind, what goes from this world to that world and from that world to this world—all of that does not belong to me; I am not that, and it is not my self. Wisely contemplating in this way, he knows it as it really is. Whatever view that “This is the self, this is the world, this I am; in the next world I shall exist eternally, without change, permanent, not subject to wearing out and extinction”—all of that does not belong to me. I am not that, and it is not my self. Wisely contemplating in this way, he knows it as it really is. At this, one monk rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, “World-honored One, can there be fear due to an internal cause?” The World-honored One replied, “There can be.” The monk asked further, “World-honored One, how can there be fear due to an internal cause?” The World-honored One replied: Monk, someone has a view like this and speaks like this, “That which I lacked in former times, suppose I cannot get it [now].” Having a view like this and speaking like this, he becomes worried and vexed. He wails, beats his breast, and is deranged. Monk, in this way there can be fear due to an internal cause.^183 The monk, having praised the World-honored One, asked further, “World honored One, can there be absence of fear due to an internal cause?” The World-honored One replied, “There can be.” The monk asked again, “World-honored One, how can there be absence of fear due to an internal cause?” The World-honored One replied: Monk, someone does not have a view like this and does not speak like this: “That which I lacked in former times, suppose I cannot get it [now].” Not

having a view like this and not speaking like this, he is not worried and not vexed. He does not wail, does not beat his breast, and is not deranged. Monk, in this way there can be absence of fear due to an internal cause. The monk, having praised the World-honored One, asked further, “World- honored One, can there be fear due to an external cause?” The World-honored One replied, “There can be.” The monk asked further, “World-honored One, how can there be fear due to an external cause?” The World-honored One replied: Monk, someone has a view like this and speaks like this: “This is the self, this is the world, this am I. In the next world I shall exist.” Having a view like this and speaking like this, he encounters the Tathāgata, or he encounters a disciple of the Tathāgata who is intelligent, wise, eloquent, and accomplished in wisdom. He is taught by the Tathāgata or by a disciple of the Tathāgata a teaching for the eradication of all identity. He is taught a teaching for the abandoning of all taints, of all “I”-[making] and “mine”- making, and for the eradication of the underlying tendency to conceit. When he is taught by the Tathāgata or by a disciple of the Tathāgata a teaching for the eradication of all identity, a teaching for the abandoning of all taints, of all “I”-[making] and “mine”-making, and for the eradication of the underlying tendency to conceit, he becomes worried and vexed. He wails, beats his breast, and is deranged. He speaks in this way: “I will be destroyed and will no longer exist.” Why is that? What that monk has said [appears to him] for a long time undesirable, displeasing, and unthinkable. What that monk has practiced much makes him become worried and vexed, makes him wail, beat his breast, and become deranged. In this way, monk, there can be fear due to an external cause. The monk, having praised the World-honored One, asked further, “World- honored One, can there be absence of fear due to an external cause?” The World-honored One replied, “There can be.” The monk asked further, “World-honored One, how can there be absence of fear due to an external cause?” The World-honored One replied:

Monk, someone does not have a view like this and does not speak like this: “This is the self, this is the world, this am I. In the next world I shall exist.” Not having a view like this and not speaking like this, he encounters the Tathāgata or he encounters a disciple of the Tathāgata who is intelligent, wise, eloquent, and accomplished in wisdom. He is taught by the Tathāgata or by a disciple of the Tathāgata a teaching for the eradication of all identity, for the abandoning of all taints, of all “I”-[making] and “mine”-making, and for the eradication of the underlying tendency to conceit. When he is taught by the Tathāgata or by a disciple of the Tathāgata a teaching for the eradication of all identity, a teaching for the abandoning of all taints, of all “I”-[making] and “mine”-making, for the eradication of the underlying tendency to conceit, then he is not worried and not vexed, does not wail, does not beat his breast, and is not deranged. He does not speak like this: “I will be destroyed and will no longer exist.” Why is that? What that monk has said [appears to him] for a long time desirable, pleasing, memorable. What the monk has practiced much makes him not become wor ried, not vexed, not wailing, not beating his breast, and not deranged. In this way, monk, there can be absence of fear due to an external cause. Then the monk praised the World-honored One saying, “It is well, it is well.” Having praised [the Buddha, saying] “It is well,” having heard what the Buddha had said, he received and retained it well for reciting, and then fell silent. At this the World-honored One praised the bhikkhus, saying: It is well, it is well, bhikkhus, could one cling to something conducive to clinging in such a way that, having clung to it, one would not become worried, not become vexed, not wail, not beat one’s breast, and not become deranged? Do you see anything conducive to clinging that one could cling to yet not become worried, not become vexed, not wail, not beat one’s breast, and not become deranged? The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised the bhikkhus, saying: It is well, it is well, could one be dependent on a view that is conducive to dependence such that, being dependent on that view, one would not become worried, not become vexed, not wail, not beat one’s breast, and

not become deranged? Do you see any view conducive to dependence that one could be dependent on yet not become worried, not become vexed, not wail, not beat one’s breast, and not become deranged? The bhikkhus replied, “We do not, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, saying: It is well, it is well. You could cling to a body if it were a body such as remains permanently without change, not of a nature to wear out and cease. [But] do you see a body that you could cling to, a body such as remains permanently without change, not of a nature to wear out and cease? The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, saying: It is well, it is well. It is said [by some] that the “I” exists because of the self, that without a self there is no “I.”^184 Yet, this self and what belongs to a self cannot be found, cannot be designated; and the existence in the mind of a [legitimate] occasion for views, for bondage, attachment, and underlying tendencies also cannot be found, cannot be designated. bhikkhus, is this not just like the view proposed and held continuously as his view by the monk Ariṭṭha, the former vulture killer? The bhikkhus replied, “It is like this, World-honored One. It is just like the view proposed and held continuously as his view by the monk Ariṭṭha, the former vulture killer.” [The Buddha said:] Again, there are six occasions for views.^185 What are the six? bhikkhus, whatever bodily form, past, future, or present, internal or external, subtle or gross, sublime or not sublime, near or far—all of that does not belong to me, I am not that, and it is not my self. Wisely contemplating in this way, one knows it as it really is. Whatever feeling... whatever perception... [whatever formation]... whatever view that “that does not belong to me,^186 I am not that, I shall not exist, I shall not possess [anything]”—all of “that does not belong to me, I am not that, and it is not my self.” Wisely contemplating in this way, one knows it as it really is.

Whatever view, what is seen, heard, cognized, and known, what is received, what is observed, what is reflected on by the mind, what goes from this world to that world, and what goes from that world to this world— all of that does not belong to me, I do not belong to that, and it is not my self. Wisely contemplating in this way, one knows it as it really is. Whatever view that “this is the self, this is the world, this I am; in the next world I shall exist eternally, without change, permanent, not of a nature to wear out and cease”—all of that does not belong to me, I am not that, and it is not my self. Wisely contemplating in this way, one knows it as it really is. Whatever monk does not see these six occasions for views as a self and also does not see them as belonging to a self—not seeing them in this way, he does not cling to this world. Not clinging to this world, he is without fear. Through being without fear, he attains final nirvana, knowing as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” He is said to be a monk who has crossed over the moat, who has gone beyond the moat, who has demolished the wall, who is without a gate, who is a mirror of noble wisdom. How has the monk crossed over the moat? The moat of ignorance has ceased to exist; it has been understood, cut off at its root, demolished, and will not arise again. This is how the monk has crossed over the moat. How has the monk gone beyond the moat? Craving for becoming has ceased to exist; it has been understood, cut off at its root, demolished, and will not arise again. This is how the monk has gone beyond the moat. How has the monk demolished the wall? The limitless [cycle of] birth and death has ceased to exist; it has been understood, cut off at its root, demolished, and will not arise again. This is how the monk has demolished the wall. How is the monk without a gate? The five lower fetters have ceased to exist; they have been understood, cut off at their root, demolished, and will not arise again. This is how the monk has attained the state of being without a gate. How is the monk a mirror of noble wisdom? The “I am” conceit has ceased to exist; it has been understood, cut off at its root, demolished, and will not arise again. This is how the monk is a mirror of noble wisdom.

This is what is meant by a monk who has crossed over the moat, has gone beyond the moat, has demolished the wall, is without a gate, and is a mirror of noble wisdom. In this way he is a rightly liberated tathāgata. Indra with his _deva_ s, Īsāna, and Brahmā with his assembly seek a basis on which the conscious- ness of a tathāgata depends, but are unable to find one. A tathāgata has become Brahmā, a tathāgata has become cool, a tathāgata is without heat, a tathāgata is not otherwise, it is like this, I say. Renunciants and brahmins misrepresent me, saying what is false and untrue, namely, “The renunciant Gotama proclaims annihilation. He pro- claims the cutting off and destruction of a truly existing living being.” I do not make proclamations about what, in this context, is [in any case] devoid of self. I do, [however], proclaim the Thus-gone One to be without worry right here and now.^187 If other persons curse the Tathāgata, strike the Tathāgata, and angrily criticize him, then the Tathāgata is not angry because of that. He is without hatred, ultimately having a mental attitude of nonharming. If [other] persons curse the Tathāgata, strike him, or angrily criticize him, what is the mental attitude of the Tathāgata at that time? The Tathāgata thinks, “What I did in the past, what I created in the past: that is the cause of this.” The Tathāgata has this mental attitude toward those who curse the Tathāgata, strike him, or angrily criticize him. If other persons revere the Tathāgata, support, respect, and esteem him, the Tathāgata is not joyful because of that, not delighted, not mentally happy because of that. If other persons revere the Tathāgata, support, respect, and esteem him, what is the mental attitude of the Tathāgata? The Tathāgata thinks, “What I have now come to understand and what I have abandoned: that is the cause of this.” The Tathāgata has this mental attitude if persons revere the Tathāgata, support, respect, and esteem him.

Then the World-honored One said to the bhikkhus:

Other persons may curse you, strike you, and angrily criticize you; or they may revere you, support, respect, and esteem you. You should not be angry because of that but should be without hatred, not giving rise to a mental attitude of harming; and you should also not be joyful and delighted, not

becoming happy. Why is that? [You should think,] “We are without a self or what belongs to a self.”^188 It is just as if right now, outside the gate of this Jeta’s Grove, other per sons were to take away the parched grass and dried-up sticks to burn or to use as they wished. What do you think? Would that parched grass and those dried-up sticks think, “Other persons are taking us away to burn or to use as they wish”?^189 The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” [The Buddha said:] It is the same if other persons curse you, strike you, or angrily criticize you, or if they revere you, support, respect, and esteem you. You too should not be angry because of that but should be without hatred, not giving rise to a mental attitude of harm; and you should not be joyful and delighted, not becoming happy. Why is that? [You should think,] “We are without a self or what belongs to a self.” My teaching is well spoken, revealed and disseminated without defi ciency, transmitted and propagated to deva s and human beings. In my teaching, being thus well-spoken, revealed and disseminated without defi ciency, transmitted and propagated to deva s and human beings, those who are liberated through right wisdom, on passing away will not be designated, they are without limit. My teaching is well spoken, revealed and disseminated without defi ciency, transmitted and propagated to deva s and human beings. My teach ing being thus well spoken, revealed and disseminated without deficiency, transmitted and propagated to deva s and human beings, those who have eradicated the five lower fetters will, on passing away, be born in between and attain final nirvana there, having attained the condition of nonreturning, not coming back to this world. My teaching is well spoken, revealed and disseminated without defi ciency, transmitted and propagated to deva s and human beings. My teach ing being thus well spoken, revealed and disseminated without deficiency, transmitted and propagated to deva s and human beings, those who have eradicated three fetters and attenuated desire, anger, and delusion have attained once-returning and, after returning once [to dwell] among deva s or human beings, will attain the ending of dukkha.

My teaching is well spoken, revealed and disseminated without defi- ciency, transmitted and propagated to _deva_ s and human beings. My teaching being thus well spoken, revealed and disseminated without deficiency, transmitted and propagated to _deva_ s and human beings, those who have eradicated three fetters, having attained stream-entry, will not fall into evil conditions, and are assured of progress toward full awakening after returning at most seven times to the realms of _deva_ s or human beings. Having returned [at most] seven times, they will attain the ending of _dukkha._^190 My teaching is well spoken, revealed and disseminated without defi- ciency, transmitted and propagated to _deva_ s and human beings. My teach- ing being thus well spoken, revealed, and disseminated without deficiency, transmitted and propagated to _deva_ s and human beings, those who have faith and who delight in me will, on passing away, all be reborn in a good destiny, like those [mentioned] previously that have a remainder. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma200-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA43.5]], [[EA50.8]], [[MA193]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA189]], [[]], [[AN4.30]], [[SN22.62]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN63]], [[SN22.23]], [[SN56.31]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA200]]
> ◄  [[ma199-bdk]] 📜  [[ma201-bdk]] ►
