---
sutta_code: "MA208"
sutta_title:
  - "箭毛 "
  - "With Sakuludāyī 2"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA208]]
> ◄  [[ma207-bdk]] 📜  [[ma209-bdk]] ►

### 208. The Discourse to Sakuludāyī (2)

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Rājagaha, staying in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.

Then, when the night was over, at dawn, the World-honored One put on his [outer] robe, took his bowl, and entered Rājagaha to beg for almsfood. Having begged almsfood [and partaken of it], he put away his [outer] robe and bowl, washed his hands and feet, put his sitting mat over his shoulder, and went into the Peacocks’ Grove, a park [frequented by] heterodox practitioners.^292 At that time there was, in the Peacocks’ Grove, a heterodox practitioner called Sakuludāyī, a renowned leader and teacher of a congregation, of great fame and respected by the people, the head of a great congregation of disciples, five hundred heterodox practitioners who honored him. He was staying with a great congregation that was noisy, agitated and dis- orderly, creating a great clamor, discussing various kinds of irrelevant talk, namely talk about kings, talk about thieves, talk about battles, talk about food, talk about robes and blankets, talk about married women, talk about girls, talk about adulterous women, talk about the world, talk about wilderness areas, talk about what is in the ocean, talk about the people of the country— they were seated together talking such kinds of irrelevant talk. Seeing the Buddha coming in the distance, the heterodox practitioner Saku- ludāyī admonished his congregation, “Keep quiet, all of you! The renunciant Gotama is coming. His congregation is silent; they always delight in silence and praise silence. If he sees that this congregation [of ours] is silent, perhaps he will come and join us.” Having ordered his congregation to be silent, the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī remained silent himself. The World-honored One approached the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī. The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī promptly rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said,^293 “Welcome, renunciant Gotama. It is a long time since the renunciant Gotama came here. Please be seated on this seat.” Then the World-honored One sat on the seat prepared by the heterodox prac- titioner Sakuludāyī. Having exchanged greetings with the World-honored One, the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī stepped back and sat to one side. The World-honored One asked, “Udāyī, what were you discussing just now? For what matter have you been seated together here?” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, let be that talk. That talk was not profound. [If] the renunciant Gotama wishes to hear about that talk, it will not be difficult to hear about it on a later occasion.”

The World-honored One asked like this three times, “Udāyī, what were you discussing just now? For what matter have you been seated together here?”^294 The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied up to three times, “Gotama, let be that talk. That talk was not profound. [If] the renunciant Gotama wishes to hear about that talk, it will not be difficult to hear about it on a later occasion.” [Then Sakuludāyī said:] But since the renunciant Gotama has three times expressed his wish to hear it, I shall now report it. Gotama, I have reasoned consideration and I have reflection. I am established in the position of reasoned consideration and in the position of reflection. I [also] have knowledge and skill in debat ing. [At one time] there was someone who claimed to be truly omniscient, to know all, to see all, to have complete knowledge and complete vision. I approached him and asked him about some matter, but he did not know. Gotama, I thought, “How can this be?”^295 The World-honored One asked: Udāyī, you have reasoned consideration and you have reflection. You are established in the position of reasoned consideration and in the position of reflection. You have knowledge and skill in debating. Who was it that claimed to be truly omniscient, to know all, to see all, to have complete knowledge and complete vision but, when you approached and asked him about some matter, did not know? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied: Gotama, it was Pūraṇa Kassapa. Why is that? Gotama, Pūraṇa Kassapa claimed to be truly omniscient, to know all, to see all, to have complete knowledge and complete vision. I, having reasoned consideration and reflection, being established in the position of reasoned consideration and in the position of reflection, having knowledge and skill in debating, approached him and asked about some matter, but he did not know. Gotama, for this reason I thought, “How can this be?” It was the same with Makkhali Gosāla, Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta, Pakudha Kaccāyana, and Ajita Kesakambalī.^296 Gotama,

Ajita Kesakambalī claimed to be truly omniscient, to know all, to see all, to have complete knowledge and complete vision. I, having reasoned con- sideration and reflection, being established in the position of reasoned con- sideration and in the position of reflection, having knowledge and skill in debating, approached him and asked about some matter, but he did not know. Gotama, for this reason I thought, “How can this be?” Gotama, I further thought, “If I approach the renunciant Gotama and ask him about some matter of the past, the renunciant Gotama will certainly be able to answer me about that matter of the past. If I approach the renunciant Gotama and ask him about some matter of the future, the renunciant Gotama will certainly be able to answer me about that matter of the future. Again, according to the matter that I ask the renunciant Gotama about, the renunciant Gotama will certainly answer me regarding the matter that I ask about.”

The World-honored One said:

Stop, stop, Udāyī, you have long been of a different view [from me], of a different belief, [seeking] a different type of happiness, a different type of pleasure, a different type of thinking; consequently you do not fully understand the meaning of what I am saying.^297 Udāyī, I have disciples who have the causes and the conditions for recalling countless former lives from the past, that is to say, one birth, two births, a hundred births, a thousand births, eons of [world] contraction, eons of [world] expansion, innumerable eons of [world] expansion and contraction. [They recall,] “As the living being named So-and-so, I was born there, with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of nutriment; I experienced this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this. Dying here, I was reborn there; dying there, I was reborn here. I was reborn here with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of nutriment; I experienced this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this.” If they come and ask me about matters of the past, then I answer them about matters of the past. Likewise, if I approach them and ask about mat- ters of the past, then they answer me about matters of the past. According

to the matter I ask them about, they answer me regarding the matter that I asked about. Again, Udāyī, I have disciples who, with the divine eye that is pure and surpasses human [vision], see beings as they die and as they are reborn as handsome or ugly, superior or inferior, going and coming between good and bad realms, in accordance with the deeds of these beings. They see this as it really is [thus], “If these living beings engaged in evil bodily conduct, evil verbal and mental conduct; if they reviled noble ones, held wrong views, and performed deeds [based on] wrong views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking-up of the body after death, [they] certainly go to a bad realm, being reborn in hell. If [however] these living beings engaged in good bodily conduct, good verbal and mental conduct, if they did not revile noble ones, held right views, and performed actions [based on] right views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking-up of the body after death, [they] certainly go to a good realm, being reborn in heaven.” If those [disciples] come and ask me about matters of the future, then I answer them about matters of the future. Likewise, if I approach them and ask about matters of the future, then they answer me about matters of the future. According to the matter I ask them about, they answer me regarding the matter that I asked about.^298 The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī said: Gotama, if this is how it is, then I am entangled in not knowing, I am entangled in not seeing, entangled in delusion and sinking into delusion— that is, when the renunciant Gotama speaks like this, “Stop, stop, Udāyī, you have long been of a different view [from me], of a different belief, [seeking] a different type of happiness, a different type of pleasure, a dif ferent type of thinking; consequently, you do not fully understand the meaning of what I am saying. “Udāyī, I have disciples who have the causes and the conditions for recalling countless former lives from the past, that is to say: one birth, two births, a hundred births, a thousand births, eons of [world] contraction, eons of [world] expansion, countless eons of [world] expansion and con traction. [They recall,] ‘As the living being named So-and-so I was born

there, with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of nutriment; I experienced this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this. Dying here, I was reborn there; dying there, I was reborn here. I was reborn here with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of nutriment; I experienced this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this.’ “If they come and ask me about matters of the past, then I answer them about matters of the past. Likewise, if I approach them and ask about mat- ters of the past, then they answer me about matters of the past. According to the matter I ask them about, they answer me regarding the matter that I asked about. “Again, Udāyī, I have disciples who, with the divine eye which is pure and surpasses human [vision], see beings as they die and as they are reborn as handsome or ugly, superior or inferior, going and coming between good and bad realms, in accordance with the deeds of these beings. They see this as it really is [thus], ‘If these living beings engaged in evil bodily conduct, evil verbal and mental conduct; if they reviled noble ones, held wrong views, and performed deeds [based on] wrong views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking-up of the body after death, [they] certainly go to a bad realm, being reborn in hell. If [however] these living beings engaged in good bodily conduct, good verbal and mental conduct; if they did not revile noble ones, held right views, and performed actions [based on] right views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking-up of the body after death, [they] certainly go to a good realm, being reborn in heaven.’ “If those [disciples] come and ask me about matters of the future, then I answer them about matters of the future. Likewise, if I approach them and ask about matters of the future, then they answer me about matters of the future. According to the matter I ask them about, they answer me regarding the matter that I asked about.” Gotama, I cannot even recall deeds that I formerly did in this life or the consequences that I formerly got from them. How then could I have the causes and conditions for recollecting events that occurred in countless former lives in the distant past?

Gotama, I cannot even see wind-borne sprites. How then could I see, with the divine eye which is pure and surpasses human [vision], beings as they die and are reborn as handsome or ugly, superior or inferior, going and coming between good and bad realms, in accordance with their [pre vious] deeds, seeing this as it really is? Gotama, I am thinking, “If the renunciant Gotama were to ask me about the teaching that I have learned from my teacher, then perhaps I could answer him to his satisfaction.” The World-honored One asked, “Udāyī, what is that teaching that you have learned from your teacher?” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī said, “Gotama, he declares an appearance that surpasses [all other] appearances. That appearance is the most excellent; that appearance is supreme.” The World-honored One asked, “Udāyī, what is that appearance?” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied: Gotama, it is an appearance such that no other appearance is superior to it; it is more sublime, more excellent. That appearance is the most excellent. That appearance is supreme! The World-honored One said: Udāyī, this is just as if some man were to speak like this: “Whichever woman is the most beautiful in the country, I want her!” And another man were to ask him like this: “Sir, regarding this most beautiful woman in the country, do you know her family name, her given name, and her birth status? Is she tall or short, stout or slim? Is she of light [complexion], or dark, or neither light nor dark? Is she a woman of the warrior class, or of the brahmin, or of the merchant, or of the worker class? Is she in the eastern region, the southern, the western, or the northern region?”—and that man were to answer, “I don’t know!” And it is as if that other man were to ask him further, “Sir, regarding this most beautiful woman in the country whom you have not seen, you do not know her family name, her given name, or her birth status; [nor do you know] if she is tall or short, stout or slim; if she is of light [com plexion], or dark, or neither light nor dark; if she is a woman of the warrior

class, or of the brahmin, or of the merchant, or of the worker class; if she is in the eastern region, the southern, the western, or the northern region. [How then can] you declare ‘I want that woman!’?” In the same way, Udāyī, you make this statement [regarding your teacher’s teaching,] “He declares an appearance that transcends [all other] appearances. That is the most excellent appearance. That is the supreme appearance.” But when I ask you about [the nature of] that appearance, you do not know. The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī said: Gotama, it is just as when the most excellent gold, superbly refined, pol- ished, and rendered pure by a goldsmith skilled in refining, is placed on a white cotton cloth in the sunshine, its most sublime appearance glows and shines with a clear light. In the same way, Gotama, we declare an appearance that surpasses [all other] appearances. That is the most excellent appearance. That is the supreme appearance. The World-honored One said: Udāyī, I will now ask you a question. Answer in accordance with your understanding. Regarding that most excellent gold, which has been superbly refined, polished, and rendered pure by a goldsmith skilled in refining, and is placed on a white cotton cloth in the sunshine so that its most sublime appearance glows and shines with a clear light—Udāyī, how do you think it compares with a glowworm glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night? Of these [two] clear lights which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the glowworm is supreme and more excellent than the clear light of the superbly refined and polished gold.” The World-honored One asked: Udāyī, what do you think of a glowworm glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night, compared with a burning oil lamp glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent?

The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the burning oil lamp is supreme and more excellent than the clear light of the glowworm.” The World-honored One asked: Udāyī, what do you think of a burning oil lamp glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night, compared with a great burning wood fire glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the great burning wood fire is supreme and more excellent than the clear light of the burning oil lamp.” The World-honored One asked: Udāyī, what do you think of a great burning wood fire glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night, compared with the morning star glowing and shining with a clear light toward dawn in a cloudless [sky]? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the morning star is supreme and more excellent than the light of the great burning wood fire.” The World-honored One asked: Udāyī, what do you think of the morning star glowing and shining with a clear light toward dawn in a cloudless [sky], compared with the light of the resplendent moon in a cloudless [sky] at midnight, glowing and shining with a clear light? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the resplendent moon is supreme and more excellent than the light of the morning star.” The World-honored One asked: Udāyī, what do you think of the light of the resplendent moon in a cloudless [sky] at midnight glowing and shining with a clear light, compared with

the light of the resplendent mid-autumn sun, glowing and shining with a clear light in a cloudless [sky]? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the resplendent sun is supreme and more excellent than the light of the resplendent moon.” The World-honored One said: Udāyī, there are many _deva_ s. Now, even though this sun and moon are of such great supernormal power, such great might, such great merit, such great majesty, yet their clear light cannot compare with the clear light of these _deva_ s. In former times I used to meet and converse with those _deva_ s, and what I said was agreeable to those _deva_ s. Nevertheless, I do not declare this: “That appearance surpasses [all other] appearances. That is the most excellent appearance. That is the supreme appearance.” But you, Udāyī, regarding the most lowly light inferior to a glowworm, declare, “That appearance surpasses [all other] appearances. That is the most excellent appearance. That is the supreme appearance.” Yet when asked about it, you do not [even] know it! The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī said, “World-honored One, I regret the error of my declaration. Well-gone One, I regret the error of my decla- ration.” The World-honored One asked, Udāyī, what do you have in mind when you say, “World-honored One, I regret the error of my declaration. Well-gone One, I regret the error of my declaration”? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied: Gotama, I made this declaration: ‘That appearance surpasses [all other] appearances. That is the most excellent appearance. That is the supreme appearance.’ The renunciant Gotama has now examined me well, taught me well, and rebuked me well, so that what I [said] has become empty and false, having nothing to it. Gotama, for this reason I speak like this:

‘World-honored One, I regret the error of my declaration. Well-gone One, I regret the error of my declaration.’” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī said, “Gotama, [there is] a future world that is entirely pleasant and there is a direct path for fully realizing that world.” The World-honored One asked, “Udāyī, what is the future world that is entirely pleasant? What is the direct path for fully realizing that world?” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied: Gotama, suppose someone abstains from killing, having abandoned killing... taking what is not given... sexual misconduct... false speech... up to... abstains from wrong view, having attained right view.^299 Gotama, this [leads to] the future world that is entirely pleasant. This is the direct path for fully realizing that world. The World-honored One said: Udāyī, I will now ask you a question. Answer according to your under standing. Udāyī, what do you think, if someone abstains from killing, having abandoned killing, is that entirely pleasant or is it mixed with pain? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, it is mixed with pain.” [The Buddha asked again]: If someone abstains from taking what is not given... from sexual mis conduct... from false speech... up to... abstains from wrong view, having attained right view, is that entirely pleasant or is it mixed with pain? The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, it is mixed with pain.” The World-honored One asked, “Udāyī, in this way, does not the path to the realization of that world involve a mixture of pain and pleasure?” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied, “Gotama, in this way the path to the realization of that world involves a mixture of pain and pleasure.” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī said, “World-honored One, I regret the error of my declaration. Well-gone One, I regret the error of my decla ration.”

The World-honored One asked, “Udāyī, what do you have in mind when you say: ‘World-honored One, I regret the error of my declaration. Well- gone One, I regret the error of my declaration’?” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī replied: Gotama, I firmly declared that there is a future world that is entirely pleasant and that there is a direct path for fully realizing that world. The renunciant Gotama has now examined me well, taught me well, and rebuked me well, so that what I [said] has become empty and false, having nothing to it. Gotama, for this reason I speak like this: “World-honored One, I regret the error of my declaration. Well-gone One, I regret the error of my declaration.” The World-honored One said, “Udāyī, there is a world that is entirely pleasant and there is a direct path for fully realizing that world.” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī asked, “Gotama, what is that world that is entirely pleasant? What is the direct path for fully realizing that world?” The World-honored One replied: Udāyī, suppose a time when a tathāgata appears in the world, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one.^300 Someone abandons... up to... the five hindrances, which defile the mind and weaken wisdom. Secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion, he dwells having attained the first jhāna; yet he does not have the same virtue, the same state of mind, and the same view as those _deva_ s [of the corre- sponding realm]. With the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of con- centration, he dwells having attained the second jhāna; yet he does not have the same virtue, the same state of mind, and the same view as those _deva_ s [of the corresponding realm].

Secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling in equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, expe- riencing happiness with the body, he dwells having attained the third jhāna, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mind- fulness, a happy abode; yet he does not have the same virtue, the same state of mind, and the same view as those _deva_ s. Udāyī, this is a world that is entirely pleasant.^301 The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī asked, “Gotama, that which is an entirely pleasant world, is that alone the utmost?” The World-honored One replied, “That which is an entirely pleasant world is not yet the utmost. Udāyī, there is another direct path for fully realizing that world.” The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī asked, “Gotama, what is the other direct path for fully realizing that world?” The World-honored One replied: Udāyī, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rap- ture and happiness born of seclusion, a monk dwells having attained the first jhāna, and he has the same virtue, the same state of mind, and the same view as those _deva_ s [of the corresponding realm]. With the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of con- centration, he dwells having attained the second jhāna, and he has the same virtue, the same state of mind, and the same view as those _deva_ s. Secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling with equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, experiencing happiness with the body, he dwells having attained the third jhāna, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mind- fulness, a happy abode, and he has the same virtue, the same state of mind and the same view as those _deva_ s.^302 Udāyī, this is the direct path for fully realizing that world. The heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī asked:

Gotama, do the disciples of the renunciant Gotama practice the holy life under the renunciant Gotama for the sake of this entirely pleasant world, for the sake of this direct path for fully realizing that world? The World-honored One replied: Udāyī, my disciples do not practice the holy life under me for the sake of this entirely pleasant world and also not for the sake of this direct path for fully realizing that world. Udāyī, there are other things that are superior, more sublime, more excellent, for the sake of realizing which my disciples practice the holy life under me. At this the great congregation [of Sakuludāyī] broke into a loud uproar: There is something superior, more sublime, more excellent than this, for the sake of realizing which the disciples of the renunciant Gotama practice the holy life under the renunciant Gotama! Then the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī, having admonished and silenced his congregation, said:

Gotama, what is that which is superior, more sublime, more excellent, for the sake of realizing which the disciples of the renunciant Gotama practice the holy life under the renunciant Gotama? The World-honored One replied: Udāyī, with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with neither pain nor pleas- ure, and with purity of equanimity and mindfulness, a monk dwells having attained the fourth jhāna. Udāyī, this is what is superior, more sublime, more excellent, for the sake of realizing which my disciples practice the holy life under me.^303 At this the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī rose from his seat, wanting to bow down at the feet of the Buddha.^304 Then the disciples of the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī and his companions in the holy life said to the het- erodox practitioner Sakuludāyī:

Venerable sir, now, when you should be acting as a teacher, are you wanting to become a disciple of the renunciant Gotama? Venerable sir, [if you con- sider that] you should not be acting as a teacher, then become a disciple of the renunciant Gotama!^305 In this way the disciples of the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī and his companions in the holy life prevented the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī from practicing the holy life under the World-honored One. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the heterodox practitioner Sakuludāyī was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma208-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA208]]
> ◄  [[ma207-bdk]] 📜  [[ma209-bdk]] ►
