---
sutta_code: "MA201"
sutta_title:
  - "嗏帝 "
  - "To Sāti"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA201]]
> ◄  [[ma200-bdk]] 📜  [[ma202-bdk]] ►

### 201. The Discourse on [the Monk] Sāti

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the monk Sāti, the son of a fisherman, had given rise to this evil view: “As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, it is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another.” Having heard this, the [other] bhikkhus approached the monk Sāti and asked him:

Sāti, is it true that you say this: “As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, it is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another”? The monk Sāti replied: Venerable ones, it is true that, as I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, it is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another. Then the bhikkhus reprimanded the monk Sāti, saying:

You should not say this! Do not misrepresent the World-honored One! It is not good to misrepresent the World-honored One. The World-honored One does not say this. Monk Sāti, this present consciousness arises subject to causes and conditions. The World-honored One has with countless skillful means stated that consciousness arises subject to causes and conditions. The conditions being present, consciousness arises; the conditions being absent, it ceases. Monk Sāti, you should quickly give up this evil view. [Despite] being reprimanded by the bhikkhus, the monk Sāti held on strongly to this evil view and one-sidedly stated, “This is true; anything else is false.” [The exchange] went like this three times. Having been unable to get the monk Sāti to give up this evil view, the group of many bhikkhus rose from their seats and left. They approached the Buddha, paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. They said:

World-honored One, the monk Sāti has given rise to this evil view: “As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, it is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another.” World-honored One, having heard this, we approached the monk Sāti and asked him, “Sāti, is it true that you say this: ‘As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, it is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another’?” The monk Sāti replied to us, “Venerable ones, it is true that, as I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, it is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another.” World-honored One, we reprimanded him, saying, “Monk Sāti, you should not say this! Do not misrepresent the World-honored One! It is not good to misrepresent the World-honored One. The World-honored One does not say this. Monk Sāti, this present consciousness arises subject to causes and conditions. The World-honored One has with countless skillful means stated that consciousness arises subject to causes and conditions. The con ditions being present, consciousness arises; the conditions being absent, it ceases. Monk Sāti, you should quickly give up this evil view.” [Despite] being reprimanded by us, he strongly held on to this evil view and one-sidedly stated, “This is true; anything else is false.” [The exchange]

went like this three times. World-honored One, being unable to get the monk Sāti to give up this evil view, we rose from our seats and left. Having heard this, the World-honored One told one monk, “You approach the monk Sāti and say this to him: ‘The World-honored One summons you.’” Then that one monk, having received the instruction from the World-hon- ored One, rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. He approached the monk Sāti and said to him, “The World-honored One summons you.” The monk Sāti approached the Buddha, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. The World-honored One asked him: Is it true that you say this: “As I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, it is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another”? The monk Sāti replied: World-honored One, it is true that, as I understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, it is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another. The World-honored One asked him, “What is this consciousness?” The monk Sāti replied: World-honored One, this consciousness is what speaks, feels, acts, instructs, appears, and manifests; that is, it is what does good and evil deeds and experiences their results. The World-honored One reprimanded him, saying: Sāti, how is it that you understand the Dharma taught by me in this way? From whose mouth have you heard that I teach the Dharma in this way? You foolish man, how is it that you one-sidedly state what I have not stated one-sidedly? You foolish man, being reprimanded by all the bhikkhus who heard it, you should then have answered according to the Dharma. I shall now ask the bhikkhus about this.

Then the World-honored One asked the bhikkhus, “Do you too understand the Dharma taught by me in this way: ‘It is this present consciousness that will be reborn, not another’?” Then the bhikkhus replied, “No.” The World-honored One asked them, “How do you understand the Dharma taught by me?” The bhikkhus replied: As we understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One, con sciousness arises subject to causes and conditions. The World-honored One has taught that consciousness arises subject to causes and conditions. The conditions being present, consciousness arises; the conditions being absent, it ceases. It is in this way that we understand the Dharma taught by the World-honored One. The World-honored One praised them: It is well, it is well, bhikkhus, that you understand the Dharma taught by me in this way. Why is that? I indeed say that consciousness arises subject to causes and conditions. I have taught that consciousness arises subject to causes and conditions. The conditions being present, consciousness arises; the conditions being absent, it ceases. According to what conditions its arising, consciousness is called after that condition. [If] consciousness arises conditioned by the eye and visible forms, then the consciousness arisen in this way is called eye consciousness. In the same way, [if] con sciousness arises conditioned by the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... the mind and mind objects, the consciousness arisen in this way is called mind consciousness.^192 It is just as with fire, according to what conditions its arising, it is called after that condition. A fire that arises conditioned by wood is called a wood fire. A fire conditioned by grass or by a dung heap is called a grass [fire] or a dung heap fire. In the same way, according to what conditions its arising, consciousness is called after that condition. [If] consciousness arises conditioned by the eye and visible forms, the consciousness arisen in this way is called eye consciousness. In the same way, [if] consciousness arises conditioned by

the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... the mind and mind objects, the consciousness arisen in this way is called mind consciousness. The World-honored One praised them, saying: It is well, it is well that you understand me to have taught the Dharma in this way. But this fool, the monk Sāti, has a confused grasp of both the meaning and the phrasing [of it]. Because of his own confused grasp, he misrepresents me and harms himself. He commits a transgression and an offense. He is doing a disfavor to his wise companions in the holy life, and has committed a major offense. You foolish man, do you understand this evil, unwholesome situation? Then the monk Sāti, having been rebuked to his face by the World-honored One, was sad and distressed. He hung his head in silence, unable to reply, as if immersed in thought.^193 Then the World-honored One, having rebuked the monk Sāti to his face, said to the bhikkhus:

I shall teach you the ultimate Dharma, which is free from affliction and free from heat, permanent and unchanging, as it is contemplated by the wise. Listen closely, listen closely and pay proper attention. Then the bhikkhus listened to receive the teaching. The Buddha said, “Do you see that this ?”^194 The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Do you see that this ?”^195 The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Do you see that, once has ceased, all that is also of a nature to cease?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Do you see that this has ?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Do you see that this has ?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.”

The World-honored One said, “Do you see that <once nutriment has ceased>, all that has come to be is also of a nature to cease?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Are you in no doubt that this <comes to be>?” The bhikkhus replied, “We are in no [doubt], World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Are you in no doubt that this <comes to be due to nutriment>?” The bhikkhus replied, “We are in no [doubt], World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Are you in no doubt that once <nutriment> has ceased, all that has <come to be> is also of a nature to cease?” The bhikkhus replied, “We are in no [doubt], World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “On thus wisely seeing as it really is that this <comes to be>, does all doubt cease?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “On thus wisely seeing as it really is that this <comes to be due to nutriment>, does all doubt cease?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “On thus wisely seeing as it really is that once <nutriment> has ceased, all that <comse to be> is also of a nature to cease, does all doubt cease?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Are you in no doubt that this has <come to be>?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Are you in no doubt that this has <come to be due to nutriment>?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said, “Are you in no doubt that once <nutriment> has ceased, all that has <come to be> is also of a nature to cease?” The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, saying: It is well, it is well that you understand it in this way and see it in this way. If, [however], you were to say “This view of mine is so clear and pure!” and if you were to cling to it, cherish it, guard it, and be unwilling to let go of it, then would you have understood the teaching I have for a

long time taught you about the Dharma as resembling a raft, as being for opening up a channel that had been blocked?^196

The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, saying:

It is well, it is well that you understand it in this way and see it in this way. If you were to say “This view of mine is so clear and pure!” and yet you do not cling to it, do not cherish it, do not guard it, but are willing to let go of it, then would you have understood the teaching that I have for a long time taught you about the Dharma as resembling a raft, as being for opening up a channel that had been blocked?

The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them:

It is well, it is well, if heterodox practitioners come and ask you, “Venerable friends, as to this view of yours, so clear and pure, what is its meaning, what is its purpose, what is its virtue?”—how will you reply?^197

The bhikkhus replied:

World-honored One, if heterodox practitioners come and ask us, “Venerable friends, as to this view of yours, so clear and pure, what is its meaning, what is its purpose, what is its virtue?”—then we will reply in this way: “Venerable friends, it is for the sake of disenchantment, for the sake of dispassion, for the sake of knowing and seeing as it really is.” World-honored One, if het- erodox practitioners come and ask us, then we will reply in this way.

The World-honored One praised them, saying:

It is well, it is well, if heterodox practitioners come and ask you, then you should reply in this way. Why is that? [Because] this is what is to be explained and contemplated. [bhikkhus, you should contemplate the four nutriments]. The first is edible food, coarse and fine; the second is contact; the third is volition; and the fourth is consciousness. What is the cause of these four nutriments, how do they arise, from what are they born, based on what do they exit? Those four nutriments

are caused by craving, they arise from craving, from craving they are born, and based on craving they exist. What is the cause of craving, how does it arise, from what is it born, based on what does it exit? Craving is caused by feeling, it arises from feeling, from feeling it is born, and based on feeling it exists. What is the cause of feeling, how does it arise, from what is it born, based on what does it exit? Feeling is caused by contact, it arises from contact, from contact it is born, and based on contact it exists. What is the cause of contact, how does it arise, from what is it born, based on what does it exit? Contact is caused by the six sense spheres, it arises from the six sense spheres, from the six sense spheres it is born, and based on the six sense spheres it exists. What is the cause of the six sense spheres, how do they arise, from what are they born, based on what do they exit? The six sense spheres are caused by name-and-form, they arise from name-and-form, from name and-form they are born, and based on name-and-form they exist. What is the cause of name-and-form, how does it arise, from what is it born, based on what does it exit? Name-and-form is caused by con sciousness, it arises from consciousness, from consciousness it is born, and based on consciousness it exists. What is the cause of consciousness, how does it arise, from what is it born, based on what does it exit? Consciousness is caused by formations, it arises from formations, from formations it is born, and based on for mations it exists. What is the cause of formations, how do they arise, from what are they born, based on what do they exit? Formations are caused by ignorance, they arise from ignorance, from ignorance they are born, and based on ignorance they exist. Thus, conditioned by ignorance there are formations; conditioned by formations there is consciousness; conditioned by consciousness there is name-and-form; conditioned by name-and-form there are the six sense spheres; conditioned by the six sense spheres there is contact; conditioned by contact there is feeling; conditioned by feeling there is craving; con ditioned by craving there is clinging; conditioned by clinging there is becoming; conditioned by becoming there is birth; conditioned by birth

there is old age and death, worry and sadness, crying and weeping, sorrow and pain, dejection and vexation. In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ arises.^198 Conditioned by birth there is old age and death. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by birth there is old age and death? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by birth there is old age and death; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by birth there is indeed old age and death. [The Buddha said,] “Conditioned by becoming there is birth. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by becoming there is birth?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by becoming there is birth; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by becoming there is indeed birth.^199 [The Buddha said,] “Conditioned by clinging there is becoming. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by clinging there is becoming?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by clinging there is becoming; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by clinging there is indeed becoming. [The Buddha said,] “Conditioned by craving there is clinging. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by craving there is clinging?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by craving there is clinging; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by craving there is indeed clinging. [The Buddha said,] “Conditioned by feeling there is craving. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by feeling there is craving?”

The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by feeling there is craving; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by feeling there is indeed craving. [The Buddha said,] “Conditioned by contact there is feeling. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by contact there is feeling?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by contact there is feeling; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by contact there is indeed feeling. [The Buddha said:] Conditioned by the six sense spheres there is contact. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by the six sense spheres there is contact? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by the six sense spheres there is contact; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by the six sense spheres there is indeed contact. [The Buddha said:] Conditioned by name-and-form there are the six sense spheres. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by name-and-form there are the six sense spheres? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by name-and-form there are the six sense spheres; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] condi tioned by name-and-form there are indeed the six sense spheres. [The Buddha said:] Conditioned by consciousness there is name-and-form. What do you think

regarding this statement that conditioned by consciousness there is name- and-form? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by consciousness there is name-and- form; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by consciousness there is indeed name-and-form. [The Buddha said,] “Conditioned by formations there is consciousness. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by formations there is consciousness?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by formations there is consciousness; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by for- mations there is indeed consciousness. [The Buddha said,] “Conditioned by ignorance there are formations. What do you think regarding this statement that conditioned by ignorance there are formations?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, conditioned by ignorance there are formations; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] conditioned by ignorance there are indeed formations. Thus, conditioned by ignorance there are formations; conditioned by for- mations there is consciousness; conditioned by consciousness there is name- and-form; conditioned by name-and-form there are the six sense spheres; conditioned by the six sense spheres there is contact; conditioned by contact there is feeling; conditioned by feeling there is craving; conditioned by craving there is clinging; conditioned by clinging there is becoming; condi- tioned by becoming there is birth; conditioned by birth there is old age and death, worry and sadness, crying and weeping, sorrow and pain, dejection and vexation. In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ arises. The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well, bhikkhus, that you say this. Why is that? [Because] I

too say this:^200 conditioned by ignorance there are formations; conditioned by formations there is consciousness; conditioned by consciousness there is name-and-form; conditioned by name-and-form there are the six sense spheres; conditioned by the six sense spheres there is contact; conditioned by contact there is feeling; conditioned by feeling there is craving; con ditioned by craving there is clinging; conditioned by clinging there is becoming; conditioned by becoming there is birth; conditioned by birth there is old age and death, worry and sadness, crying and weeping, sorrow and pain, dejection and vexation. In this way this entire great mass of dukkha arises. With the cessation of birth, old age and death cease. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of birth, old age and death cease? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of birth, old age and death cease; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the cessation of birth, old age and death do indeed cease. [The Buddha said,] “With the cessation of becoming, birth ceases. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of becoming, birth ceases?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of becoming, birth ceases; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the cessation of becom ing, birth does indeed cease. [The Buddha said,] “With the cessation of clinging, becoming ceases. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of clinging, becoming ceases?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of clinging, becoming ceases; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the cessation of cling ing, becoming does indeed cease.

[The Buddha said,] “With the cessation of craving, clinging ceases. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of craving, cling- ing ceases?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of craving, clinging ceases; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the cessation of craving, clinging does indeed cease. [The Buddha said,] “With the cessation of feeling, craving ceases. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of feeling, craving ceases?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of feeling, craving ceases; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the cessation of feeling, craving does indeed cease. [The Buddha said,] “With the cessation of contact, feeling ceases. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of contact, feeling ceases?” The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of contact, feeling ceases; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the cessation of contact, feeling does indeed cease. [The Buddha said:] With the cessation of the six sense spheres, contact ceases. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of the six sense spheres, contact ceases? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of the six sense spheres, contact ceases; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the ces- sation of the six sense spheres, contact does indeed cease.

[The Buddha said:] With the cessation of name-and-form, the six sense spheres cease. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of name and-form, the six sense spheres cease? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of name-and-form, the six sense spheres cease; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the cessation of name-and-form, the six sense spheres do indeed cease. [The Buddha said:] With the cessation of consciousness, name-and-form ceases. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of consciousness, name-and-form ceases? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of consciousness, name-and-form ceases; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the ces sation of consciousness, name-and-form does indeed cease. [The Buddha said:] With the cessation of formations, consciousness ceases. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of formations, con sciousness ceases? The bhikkhus replied: World-honored One, with the cessation of formations, consciousness ceases; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the ces sation of formations, consciousness does indeed cease. [The Buddha said:] With the cessation of ignorance, formations cease. What do you think regarding this statement that with the cessation of ignorance, formations cease?

The bhikkhus replied:

World-honored One, with the cessation of ignorance, formations cease; this is what we [too] think. Why is that? [Because] with the cessation of ignorance, formations do indeed cease. Thus, with the cessation of ignorance, formations cease; with the cessation of formations, consciousness ceases; with the cessation of consciousness, name-and-form ceases; with the cessation of name-and-form, the six sense spheres cease; with the cessation of the six sense spheres, contact ceases; with the cessation of contact, feeling ceases; with the cessation of feeling, craving ceases; with the cessation of craving, clinging ceases; with the ces- sation of clinging, becoming ceases; with the cessation of becoming, birth ceases; with the cessation of birth, old age and death cease, worry and sad- ness, crying and weeping, sorrow and pain, dejection and vexation can come to cease. In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ ceases.

The World-honored One praised them, [saying:]

It is well, it is well, bhikkhus, that you say this. Why is that? I too say that with the cessation of ignorance, formations cease; with the cessation of for- mations, consciousness ceases; with the cessation of consciousness, name- and-form ceases; with the cessation of name-and-form, the six sense spheres cease; with the cessation of the six sense spheres, contact ceases; with the cessation of contact, feeling ceases; with the cessation of feeling, craving ceases; with the cessation of craving, clinging ceases; with the cessation of clinging, becoming ceases; with the cessation of becoming, birth ceases; with the cessation of birth, old age and death cease, worry and sadness, crying and weeping, sorrow and pain, dejection and vexation can come to cease. In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ ceases.

The World-honored One praised them, [saying:]

It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you think, in relation to the past, “In past times did I exist? In past times did I not exist? How did I exist in past times? From what cause did I exist in past times?”

The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.”

The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you think, in relation to the future, “In the future will I exist? In the future will I not exist? How will I exist in the future? From what cause will I exist in the future?” The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you have inner doubt, thinking, “What is this? How is this? From where did this living being come? Where will it go? From what cause does it exist? From what cause will it exist?” The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you intentionally kill your parents, harm an arahant disciple of the Buddha,^201 cause a rift in the noble sangha, or with evil intent toward the Buddha [cause] the Tathāgata’s blood to flow?^202 The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you intentionally violate the precepts, give up the precepts, and abandon the path? The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you abandon this [Dharma] and seek outside it for someone else to revere, seek a [different] field of merit? The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:]

It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you look up to a renunciant or brahmin who says,^203 “Venerable ones, I know what can be known, I see what can be seen”? The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying,] “It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you consider that auspicious signs bring about purification?” The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, would you con- sider as true the views of renunciants and brahmins regarding auspicious signs, regarding their various ascetic practices, regarding their various aus- terities, and regarding their various [forms of self-inflicted] distress? The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them [saying]: It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, if in your body there were to arise a feverish disease, giving rise to very severe pain, such as would lead to the wish to end your life, would you abandon this [Dharma] and seek outside it for some renunciant or brahmin who might have mem- orized a spell consisting of one verse, or two verses, three verses, four verses, many verses, a hundred verses, [thinking,] “Memorizing this spell will free me from my _dukkha_ ”? That is, would you seek [outside the Dharma] for the source of _dukkha_ and for attaining the cessation of _dukkha_?^204 The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying,] “It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, will you experience an eighth exis- tence [beyond the seven of a stream-enterer]?” The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well. Knowing in this way, seeing in this way, do you perhaps speak [and think] like this: “We respect the renunciant; we esteem the renunciant; the renunciant Gotama is our revered teacher”?

The bhikkhus replied, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well, are you replying to my questions according to what you have understood for yourselves, seen for yourselves, and realized for yourselves, having attained the supreme and full awakening?” The bhikkhus replied, “That is so, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised them, [saying:] It is well, it is well, I have trained you rightly in the complete and ultimate Dharma that is free from vexation, free from fever, that is permanent and unchanging, known by right knowledge, seen by right knowledge, and realized by right knowledge. It was for this reason that I earlier said, “I shall teach you the ultimate Dharma that is free from vexation, free from fever, permanent and unchang ing, known by right knowledge, seen by right knowledge, and realized by right knowledge.” [Listen closely] again. With the coming together of three things there is entry into the mother’s womb: the parents come together in one place, the mother is in season, and the gandhabba has arrived. With the coming together of these three things there is entry into the mother’s womb.^205 Having been carried in the mother’s womb for nine months or ten months, [the child] is born. Having been born, he is nourished with “blood”; in the noble Dharma “blood” is a term for mother’s milk. At a later time his faculties become mature. With his faculties complete, he is fed coarse cereal foods and his body is smeared with butter oil.^206 On seeing visible forms with the eye, he delights in and becomes attached to beautiful forms and dislikes ugly forms. Mindfulness of the body is not established in him. With his limited mind, liberation of the mind and liberation through wisdom are not understood as they really are. Evil and unwholesome states that arise are not eradicated without remainder, not destroyed without remainder. It is the same with the ear... with the nose... with the tongue... with the body... on cognizing mind-objects with the mind, he delights in and becomes attached to beautiful mind objects and dislikes ugly mind objects. Mindfulness of the body is not established in him. With his limited

mind, liberation of the mind and liberation through wisdom are not under- stood as they really are. Evil and unwholesome states that arise are not eradicated without remainder, not destroyed without remainder. In this way he likes or dislikes the feelings he experiences according to whether they are pleasant, painful, or neutral. He delights in those feelings, seeks, becomes attached to, and clings to those feelings. If they are pleasant feelings, then for him, having delighted in those feelings, having sought, become attached to, and clung to those feelings, this is his clinging. Conditioned by clinging there is becoming; conditioned by becoming there is birth; conditioned by birth there is old age and death, worry and sadness, crying and weeping, sorrow and pain, dejection and vexation. In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ arises. bhikkhus, is he not completely and continuously bound by craving, just like the monk Sāti, the son of a fisherman? The bhikkhus replied, “That is so, World-honored One. He is completely and continuously bound by craving, just like the monk Sāti, the son of a fisherman.” [The Buddha spoke further:] There is a time when a tathāgata appears in the world, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one.^207 [A disciple of the Tathāgata,] on seeing visible forms with the eye, does not delight in or become attached to beautiful forms and does not dislike ugly forms. Mindfulness of the body is established in him. With his limitless mind, liberation of the mind and liberation through wisdom are understood as they really are. Evil and unwholesome states that arise are eradicated without remainder, destroyed without remainder. It is the same with the ear... with the nose... with the tongue... with the body... on cognizing mind-objects with the mind, he does not [delight in or] become attached to beautiful mental objects and does not dislike ugly mind-objects. Mindfulness of the body is established in him. With his limitless mind, liberation of the mind and liberation through wis- dom are understood as they really are. Evil and unwholesome states that arise are destroyed without remainder.

In this way he eradicates like or dislike for the feelings he experiences, whether pleasant, painful, or neutral. He does not delight in those feelings, does not seek, does not become attached to, and does not cling to those feelings. If they are pleasant feelings, then for him, no longer delighting in those feelings, no longer seeking, not becoming attached to or clinging to feelings, clinging has ceased. With the cessation of clinging, becoming ceases; with the cessation of becoming, birth ceases; with the cessation of birth, old age and death cease, worry and sadness, crying and weeping, sorrow and pain, dejection and vexation can come to cease. In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ ceases. bhikkhus, is he not completely liberated by the eradication of craving? The bhikkhus replied, “That is so, World-honored One. He is completely liberated by the eradication of craving.” When this teaching had been given, the three-thousandfold great-thou- sandfold world-system quaked three times. It quaked, quaked totally; it shuddered, shuddered totally; it shook, shook totally.^208 For this reason this discourse is named “Liberation by the Destruction of Craving.” Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.

###

## On Potaliya


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma201-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA21.3]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA21.3]], [[MA201]], [[MN148]], [[SN35.60]], [[]], [[MN18]], [[AN10.176]], [[DN2]], [[MN27]], [[MN76]], [[MN94]], [[MN101]], [[AN10.99]], [[AN4.198]], [[MN51]], [[SN35.120]], [[DN3]], [[DN4]], [[DN5]], [[DN6]], [[DN7]], [[DN8]], [[DN9]], [[DN10]], [[DN11]], [[DN12]], [[DN13]], [[MN53]], [[MN60]], [[MN79]], [[MN107]], [[MN112]], [[AN4.14]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN5.76]], [[AN5.140]], [[AN11.17]], [[MN39]], [[SN35.127]], [[SN35.240]], [[AN3.16]], [[AN4.37]], [[MN33]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN22]], [[MN2]], [[SN12.31]], [[SN35.206]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA201]]
> ◄  [[ma200-bdk]] 📜  [[ma202-bdk]] ►
