---
sutta_code: "MA214"
sutta_title:
  - "鞞訶提 "
  - "Bāhitika Cloth"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA214]]
> ◄  [[ma213-bdk]] 📜  [[ma215-bdk]] ►

### 214. The Discourse on the Bāhitika Cloth

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the venerable Ānanda had to attend to some small matter at the Hall of Migāra’s Mother in the Eastern Park near Sāvatthī. Then, accompanied by another monk, the venerable Ānanda left Sāvatthī and went to the Hall of Migāra’s Mother in the Eastern Park. Once the matter had been concluded, he and the monk went back to Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time King Pasenadi of Kosala came riding out of Sāvatthī on the elephant Ekapuṇḍarīka accompanied by the minister Sirivaḍḍha. The venerable Ānanda saw King Pasenadi of Kosala approaching in the distance and asked his fellow monk, “Is that King Pasenadi of Kosala?”^374 [The monk] answered, “Yes, it is.” Then the venerable Ānanda left the road and stood under a tree. King Pase- nadi of Kosala saw the venerable Ānanda among the trees and asked, “Siri- vaḍḍha, is that the renunciant Ānanda?” and Sirivaḍḍha answered, “Yes, it is.” King Pasenadi of Kosala told his minister Sirivaḍḍha: “Lead this elephant

to the renunciant Ānanda,” and Sirivaḍḍha, having received the king’s order, led the elephant to the venerable Ānanda. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, where are you coming from, and where do you wish to go?” The venerable Ānanda answered, “Great King, I am coming from the Hall of Migāra’s Mother in the Eastern Park and wish to go to Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.” King Pasenadi of Kosala said, “Ānanda, if you have no urgent matter to attend to at Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park, come with us to the Aciravatī River, out of compassion.” The venerable Ānanda accepted [the suggestion] by King Pasenadi of Kosala by remaining silent. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala let the venerable Ānanda lead the way and together they went to the Aciravatī River. Having arrived there, [the king] dismounted. He took his elephant rug, folded it in four, spread it on the ground, and offered it to the venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, please sit on this seat.” [But] the venerable Ānanda answered, “Please stop, please stop, Great King! Though my heart is pleased and satisfied [by your kindness].”^375 Three times King Pasenadi of Kosala, offered it to the venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, please sit on this seat.” And three times the venerable Ānanda said, “Please stop, please stop, Great King! Though my heart is pleased and satisfied [by your kindness]. I have my own sitting mat, on which I will sit.” Then the venerable Ānanda spread his sitting mat and sat down cross-legged. King Pasenadi of Kosala, having exchanged greetings with the venerable Ānanda, stepped back, sat to one side, and said, “Ānanda! I would like to ask a question. Am I permitted to ask it?” The venerable Ānanda answered, “Great King, ask whatever you wish. Having heard [your question],^376 I will consider it [carefully].” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, would the Tathāgata engage in bodily conduct such that renunciants or brahmins would despise this bodily conduct?” The venerable Ānanda answered: Great King, the Tathāgata does not engage in bodily conduct such that intelligent and wise renunciants, brahmins, or any other person in the world, would despise this bodily conduct.

Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying: It is well, it is well, Ānanda! What was not accomplished by me [in my question, namely the addition of] “intelligent and wise” and “other person in the world,” that has been accomplished by the venerable Ānanda. [Indeed] Ānanda, we do not consider true any praise or blame from those who are not knowledgeable; but, Ānanda, we do consider true any praise or blame from those who are knowledgeable. [So], Ānanda, would the Tathāgata engage in bodily conduct such that intelligent and wise renunciants or brah- mins or any other person in the world would despise this bodily conduct? The venerable Ānanda answered: Great King, the Tathāgata never engages in bodily conduct such that intel- ligent and wise renunciants, brahmins, or any other person in the world would despise this bodily conduct. King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, what bodily conduct is that?” The venerable Ānanda answered, “Great King, it is unwholesome bodily conduct.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, what is unwholesome bodily conduct?” The venerable Ānanda answered, “Great King, it is blameworthy bodily conduct.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, what is blameworthy bodily conduct?” The venerable Ānanda answered, “Great King, it is engaging in bodily conduct that is despised by the wise.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked: “Ānanda, what is despised by the wise?” The venerable Ānanda answered: Great King, it is engaging in bodily conduct that harms oneself, harms others, harms both oneself and others; that destroys wisdom and abets the appearance of evil; [conduct] that does not bring attainment of nirvana, [conduct] that does not lead to wisdom, does not lead to awakening, and does not lead to nirvana.^377 There are those who do not know as it really is what things are permissible and who also do not know as it really is what things are not permissible.

Not knowing as it really is what things are permissible and also not knowing as it really is what things are not permissible, they do not know as it really is what things are acceptable and also do not know as it really is what things are not acceptable. Not knowing as it really is what things are acceptable and also not knowing as it really is what things are not acceptable, they do not know as it really is which things should be abandoned and also do not know as it really is which things should not be abandoned. Not knowing as it really is which things should be abandoned and also not knowing as it really is which things should not be abandoned, they do not know as it really is which things should be achieved and also do not know as it really is which things should not be achieved. Not knowing as it really is which things should be achieved and also not knowing as it really is which things should not be achieved, they do not do things that are permissible, but instead do things that are not permissible. Not doing things that are permissible and instead doing things that are not permissible, they do not accept things that should be accepted but instead accept things that should not be accepted. Not accepting things that should be accepted and instead accepting things that should not be accepted, they do not abandon things that should be abandoned, but instead abandon things that should not be abandoned. Not abandoning things that should be abandoned and instead abandoning things that should not be abandoned, they do not achieve things that should be achieved, but instead achieve things that should not be achieved. Not achieving things that should be achieved and instead achieving things that should not be achieved, they cause things that are unwholesome to increase and things that are wholesome to diminish. For this reason the Tathāgata never acts in such a way. King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, why does the Tathāgata never act in such a way?” The venerable Ānanda answered: Great King, he is free from desire, desire being extinguished, he is free from anger, anger being extinguished, he is free from ignorance, ignorance being extinguished, the Tathāgata has cut off all unwholesome things and

achieved all wholesome things. He is the instructing teacher, the wonderful teacher, the skillful and well-disposed teacher, the leading charioteer, the well-disposed charioteer, who speaks skillfully, who speaks wonderfully, who being well-disposed speaks skillfully. This is why the Tathāgata never acts in such a way. King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying: It is well, it is well, Ānanda! The Tathāgata does not do things that are not permissible. Why is that? Because the Tathāgata is free from attachment and fully awakened. Ānanda, you are a disciple of that teacher, training in the path wishing to attain the unsurpassable peace of nirvana. Even you do not do things that are not permissible. How, then, could the Tathā- gata act in such a way? King Pasenadi of Kosala asked: Ānanda, would the Tathāgata engage in bodily conduct such that intelligent and wise renunciants or brahmins or any other person in the world would not despise this bodily conduct? The venerable Ānanda answered: Great King, the Tathāgata certainly engages in bodily conduct such that intelligent and wise renunciants, brahmins, or any other person in the world would not despise this bodily conduct. King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, what bodily conduct is that?” The venerable Ānanda answered, “Great King, it is wholesome bodily conduct.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, what is wholesome bodily conduct?” The venerable Ānanda answered, “Great King, it is blameless bodily conduct.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, what is blameless bodily con- duct?” The venerable Ānanda answered, “Great King, it is bodily conduct of the kind that is not despised by the wise.”

King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Ānanda, what is not despised by the wise?” The venerable Ānanda answered: Great King, it is engaging in bodily conduct that does not harm oneself, does not harm others, does not harm either oneself or others; [conduct] that awakens wisdom and does not abet the appearance of evil; [conduct] whereby one attains nirvana, [conduct] that leads to wisdom, leads to awakening, and leads to nirvana. [There are those who] know as it really is what things are permissible and also know as it really is what things are not permissible. Knowing as it really is what things are permissible and knowing as it really is what things are not permissible, they know as it really is what things are acceptable and know as it really is what things are not acceptable. Knowing as it really is what things are acceptable and knowing as it really is what things are not acceptable, they know as it really is which things should be abandoned and know as it really is which things should not be abandoned. Knowing as it really is which things should be abandoned and knowing as it really is which things should not be abandoned, they know as it really is which things should be achieved and know as it really is which things should not be achieved. Knowing as it really is which things should be achieved and knowing as it really is which things should not be achieved, they do things that are permissible and do not do things that are not permissible. Doing things that are permissible and not doing things that are not per- missible, they accept things that should be accepted, and do not accept things that should not be accepted. Accepting things that should be accepted and not accepting things that should not be accepted, they abandon things that should be abandoned and do not abandon things that should not be abandoned. Abandoning things that should be abandoned and not abandoning things that should not be abandoned, they achieve things that should be achieved and do not achieve things that should not be achieved. Achieving things that should be achieved and not achieving things that should not be achieved, they cause things that are unwholesome to diminish

and things that are wholesome to increase. This is why the Tathāgata cer- tainly acts in such a way. King Pasenadi of Kosala, asked, “Ānanda, why does the Tathāgata certainly act in such a way?” The venerable Ānanda answered: Great King, he is free from desire, desire being extinguished, he is free from anger, anger being extinguished, he is free from ignorance, ignorance being extinguished, the Tathāgata has cut off all unwholesome things and achieved all wholesome things. He is the instructing teacher, the wonderful teacher, the skillful and well-disposed teacher, the leading charioteer, the well-disposed charioteer, who speaks well, who speaks wonderfully, who being well-disposed speaks skillfully. This is why the Tathāgata certainly acts in such a way. King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying: It is well, it is well, Ānanda! The Tathāgata certainly does [only] things that are permissible. Why is that? Because the Tathāgata is free from attachment and fully awakened. Ānanda, you are a disciple of this teacher, training in the path, wishing to attain the unsurpassable peace of nirvana. Even you do [only] things that are permissible; how then could the Tathā- gata not act in such a way? Ānanda has spoken well and I am now delighted. Ānanda has spoken to the point and I am extremely delighted. If Ānanda were permitted to accept the revenue of a village, I would give him the revenue of a village as a reward for his teaching. Ānanda, if Ānanda were permitted to accept elephants, horses, cattle, and sheep, I would give him elephants, horses, cattle, and sheep as a reward for his teaching. Ānanda, if Ānanda were per- mitted to accept women and girls, I would give him women and girls as a reward for his teaching. Ānanda, if Ānanda were permitted to accept gold and jewels, I would give him gold and jewels as a reward for his teaching. But Ānanda is not permitted to accept any such things. [However], in my home in Kosala I have a garment, [a kind of cloak] called a _bāhitika._ It is the best [of all cloth]. It was sent [to me] as a token of trust by a king, packed in an empty parasol case. Ānanda, of all the cotton cloth in my

home in Kosala this bāhitika is the best. Why is that? This bāhitika cloth is sixteen hands long and eight hands wide. I will present this bāhitika cloth to Ānanda for his teaching. Ānanda may make three robes from it. Please accept it to increase the merit of my family in Kosala for a long time! The venerable Ānanda answered, “Please stop, please stop, Great King. Though my heart is pleased and satisfied [by your kindness]. I already have three robes, which I have accepted.” King Pasenadi of Kosala said: May Ānanda permit me to tell a simile. The wise, on hearing a simile, understand its implication. During the rainy season this Aciravatī River fills up and overflows its banks. Has Ānanda seen this? The venerable Ānanda replied, “I have seen it.” King Pasenadi of Kosala said: In the same way, if Ānanda has three robes, he may give them to bhikkhus, nuns, or male or female novices in training. If Ānanda accepts this bāhitika and has three robes made from it, he will increase the merit of my family in Kosala for a long time. The venerable Ānanda accepted it from King Pasenadi of Kosala by remaining silent. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, understanding that the venerable Ānanda had accepted it by remaining silent, presented the bāhitika cloth to the ven erable Ānanda as a reward for his teaching, rose from his seat, circumam bulated [Ānanda] three times, and left. Not long after he had left, the venerable Ānanda took the bāhitika cloth, and went to the Buddha. Having paid homage at the Buddha’s feet and stood back to one side, he said: World-honored One, today this bāhitika cloth was given to me by King Pasenadi of Kosala as a reward for my teaching. May the World-honored One step on the bāhītika cloth with both feet so that the merit of the [king’s] family in Kosala may increase for a long time.^378 Then the World-honored One stepped on the bāhitika cloth with both feet

and said, “Now, Ānanda, tell me all that you discussed with King Pasenadi of Kosala.” At this, the venerable Ānanda told the Buddha everything that he had dis- cussed with King Pasenadi of Kosala. Extending his hands with joined palms he said:

Speaking in this way, did I not misrepresent the World-honored One? Was it spoken truly according to the Dharma, spoken in the spirit of the Dharma? Was there no transgression with regard to the Dharma?^379 The World-honored One said: Speaking in this way you did not misrepresent me. You spoke truly and in accordance with the Dharma. You spoke in the spirit of the Dharma and there was no transgression with regard to the Dharma. Ānanda, if King Pasenadi of Kosala had asked me with this meaning, with these phrases, with these words, then I would have answered him with this meaning, with these phrases, with these words. Ānanda, you should bear its meaning in mind in this way, as you have spoken it. Why is that? What you have said conveys the meaning. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Ānanda and the other bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma214-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA214]]
> ◄  [[ma213-bdk]] 📜  [[ma215-bdk]] ►
