---
sutta_code: "MA21"
sutta_title:
  - "Kinti Sutta "
  - "Is This What You Think Of Me?"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA21]]
> ◄  [[ma20-bdk]] 📜  [[ma22-bdk]] ►

### 21. The Discourse on an Even Mind

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time, Venerable Sāriputta had gathered, one night, with an assem- bly of bhikkhus at the assembly hall, and was explaining to them the distinction between internal fetters and external fetters:

Venerable friends, there truly are two categories of people to be found in the world. Which two? There are those non-returners who have [only] internal fetters and who will not be reborn into this [human] realm; and there are those who are not [yet] non-returners, who have external fetters, and who will be reborn into this [human] realm. What, venerable friends, are the non-returners, who have [only] inter nal fetters, and who will not be reborn into this [human] realm? Suppose there is someone who observes the training in the precepts without trans gression or compromise, without blemish or defect. He practices in this way abundantly, overcomes impediments, and is praised by the worthy ones for being well cultivated and well endowed [in the training]. Through having observed the training in the precepts without trans gression or compromise, without blemish or defect, having practiced in this way abundantly, having overcome impediments, and having been praised by the worthy ones for being well cultivated and well endowed [in the training], he further trains in disenchantment regarding sensual desires, in dispassion, and in abandoning sensual desires. Through having trained in disenchantment regarding sensual desires, in dispassion, and in abandoning sensual desires, he attains a peaceful liberation of the mind.

Having attained it, he delights in it and enjoys it constantly, [but] does not attain final knowledge in that lifetime. With the breaking up of the body at death, he passes beyond the gods that feed on gross food and is reborn among the mind-made gods. Once reborn there, he thinks: Formerly, when I was a human being, I observed the training in the precepts without transgression or compromise, without blemish or defect. I practiced in this way abundantly and overcame imped iments, and I was praised by the worthy ones for being well cul tivated and well endowed [in the training]. Through having observed the training in the precepts without transgression or compromise, without blemish or defect, having practiced in this way abundantly and overcome impediments, and having been praised by the worthy ones for being well cultivated and well endowed [in the training], I further trained in disenchant ment regarding sensual desires, in dispassion, and in abandoning sensual desires. Through having trained in disenchantment regard ing sensual desires, in dispassion, and in abandoning sensual desires, I attained a peaceful liberation of the mind. Having attained it, I delighted in it and enjoyed it constantly, [but] did not attain final knowledge in that same lifetime. With the breaking up of the body at death, I passed beyond the gods that feed on gross food and was reborn here among the mind-made gods. Venerable friends, [suppose] there is another person who observes the training in the precepts without transgression or compromise, without blemish or defect. He practices in this way abundantly and overcomes impediments, and is praised by the worthy ones for being well cultivated and well endowed [in the training]. Through having observed the training in the precepts without trans gression or compromise, without blemish or defect, having practiced in this way abundantly and overcome impediments, and having been praised by the worthy ones for being well cultivated and well endowed [in the training], he further trains in the realm of form, abandoning desire, aban doning activities. He trains in giving up and casting aside sensual desire.

Through having trained in the realm of form, abandoning desire, abandoning activities, having trained in giving up and casting aside sensual desire, he attains a peaceful liberation of the mind. Having attained it, he delights in it and enjoys it constantly, [but] does not attain final knowledge in that lifetime. With the breaking up of the body at death, he passes beyond the gods that feed on gross food and is reborn among the mind-made gods. Once reborn there, he thinks: Formerly, when I was a human being, I observed the training in the precepts without transgression or compromise, without blemish or defect. I practiced in this way abundantly and overcame imped- iments, and was praised by the worthy ones for being well culti- vated and well endowed [in the training]. Through having observed the training in the precepts without transgression or compromise, without blemish or defect, having practiced in this way abundantly and overcome impediments, and having been praised by the worthy ones for being well cultivated and well endowed [in the training], I further trained in the realm of form, abandoning desire, aban- doning activities. I trained in giving up and casting aside sensual desire. Through having trained in the realm of form, abandoning desire, abandoning activities, having trained in giving up and casting aside sensual desire, I attained a peaceful liberation of the mind. Having attained it, I delighted in it and enjoyed it constantly, [but] did not attain final knowledge in that same lifetime. With the break- ing up of the body at death, I passed beyond the gods feeding on gross food and was reborn here among the mind-made gods.

Such a person, venerable friends, is called a non-returner who has [only] internal fetters and who will not be reborn into this [human] realm. What, venerable friends, is meant by those who are not [yet] non- returners, who have external fetters, and who will be reborn into this [human] realm? Suppose a person observes the training in the precepts, guards [against breaking] the code of rules, and skillfully controls his

comportment in accordance with proper conduct. He trains in the pre cepts in this way, seeing great danger in even the slightest transgression and being apprehensive of it. Such a person, venerable friends, is called one who is not [yet] a non-returner, who has external fetters, and who will still be reborn into this [human] realm. Thereupon, numerous gods of even mind,^96 of resplendent and majestic form, visited the Buddha just before dawn. After paying their respects to the Buddha, they stood to one side and addressed him: World-honored One, this past night Venerable Sāriputta has gathered with an assembly of bhikkhus at the assembly hall. He has explained to those bhikkhus the distinction between internal fetters and external fetters, telling them: “Venerable friends, there truly are two categories of people to be found in the world: those who have [only] internal fetters and those who have [also] external fetters.” World-honored One, the assem bly is delighted [by his explanation]. May the World-honored One, out of compassion, go to the assembly hall! Then the World-honored One acceded to the request of the gods of even mind by remaining silent. The gods of even mind understood that the World honored One had consented by remaining silent, paid homage at his feet, and, after circumambulating him three times, vanished from the spot. Not long after the gods of even mind had gone, the World-honored One arrived before the gathering of bhikkhus at the assembly hall and sat on a pre pared seat. Once seated, the World-honored One spoke in praise: Very good! Very good, Sāriputta! You are most excellent! Why? This past night you have gathered with an assembly of bhikkhus at this assem bly hall, and you have explained to the bhikkhus the distinction between internal fetters and external fetters, [saying]: “Venerable friends, there truly are two categories of people to be found in the world: those who have [only] internal fetters and those who have [also] external fetters.” Sāriputta, numerous gods of even mind visited me this past night just before dawn. After paying homage, they stood to one side and addressed me: “World-honored One, this past night Venerable Sāriputta

has assembled with a gathering of bhikkhus at the assembly hall. He has explained to the bhikkhus the distinction between internal fetters and external fetters, [saying]: ‘Venerable friends, there truly are two cate- gories of people to be found in the world: those who have [only] internal fetters and those who have [also] external fetters.’ World-honored One, we are delighted [by his explanation]. May the World-honored One, out of compassion, join us in the assembly hall!” I acceded to the request of the gods of even mind by remaining silent. The gods of even mind understood that I had consented by [remaining] silent, paid hom- age at my feet and, after circumambulating me three times, vanished from the spot. Sāriputta, those gods of even mind are able to stand together on the tip of an awl—ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty of them— without obstructing one another. Sāriputta, it was not after being born into their heavenly realm that those gods of even mind cultivated a good mind, extensively and greatly, and thereby acquired the ability to stand together on the tip of an awl—ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty of them—without obstructing one another. Sāriputta, it was while still in the human realm [in a former life] that those gods of even mind cultivated a good mind, extensively and greatly, and thereby acquired the ability to stand together on the tip of an awl—ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty of them—without obstructing one another. Therefore, Sāriputta, one should cultivate tranquility—tranquility of the sense faculties, tranquility of the mind, and tranquility in one’s physical, verbal, and mental actions—all in accordance with [the teach- ings of] the World-honored One and with [one’s] wise companions in the holy life. Sāriputta, the erroneous adherents of other sects [will come to] long-lasting downfall and loss. Why? Because they do not get to hear such sublime teachings. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the bhikkhus were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma21-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M ii 238 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA29.8]], [[ITI105]], [[ITI15]], [[SNP3.12]], [[JA493]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA21]]
> ◄  [[ma20-bdk]] 📜  [[ma22-bdk]] ►
