---
sutta_code: "MA216"
sutta_title:
  - "Cūḷasīhanāda Sutta "
  - "Lion’s Roar Shorter Discourse"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA216]]
> ◄  [[ma215-bdk]] 📜  [[ma217-bdk]] ►

### 216. The Discourse on What Arises from Affection

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time there was a brahmin whose only son, whom he loved greatly and doted on, and whom he never tired of looking at, suddenly died. After his death, the brahmin grieved, could not eat or drink, and would not dress [properly] or use scented unguents. He would only go to the charnel ground where the child had been laid to rest, and weep in recollection of him. Then, while wandering about, the brahmin approached the Buddha and, having exchanged greetings, stepped back and sat to one side. The World-honored One said, “Brahmin, why do your faculties appear unsettled now?”

The brahmin answered: How could my faculties be settled now? Why is that? My only son, whom I loved greatly and doted on, and whom I never tired of looking at, died suddenly. Since his death I have been grieving. I am unable to eat or drink and do not dress [properly] or use scented unguents. I only go to the charnel ground where the child had been laid to rest, and weep in recol- lection of him. The World-honored One said, “It is like this, brahmin; it is like this, brah- min. Whenever affection arises, there then arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.” The brahmin said: Gotama, how can you say that whenever affection arises, there then arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation? Gotama, you should know that whenever affection arises, there arise joy and happiness in the mind. Three times the World-honored One spoke like this, “It is like this, brahmin; it is like this, brahmin. Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.” And three times the brahmin said to him, “Gotama, how can you say that whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation? Gotama, you should know that whenever affection arises, there arise joy and happiness in the mind.” Then the brahmin, having heard what the Buddha said, did not agree. Having expressed only disagreement, he then rose from his seat and left, shaking his head. At that time, in front of the entrance to Jeta’s Grove, a group of many youths from the town were gambling together. Having seen them in the dis- tance, the brahmin thought, “There is no one in the world more clever or wise than a gambler. Let me now approach them and tell them the whole dis- cussion that I have had with Gotama.” Then the brahmin went to where the group of many youths from the town were gambling together and told them the whole discussion that he had had with the World-honored One. Having heard it, the group of many youths from the town that were gambling said:

Brahmin, how can he say that whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation? Brahmin, he should know that whenever affection arises, there arise joy and happiness in the mind. On hearing this, the brahmin thought, “What these gamblers say agrees with what I say.” And he left, nodding his head. Then the story got around until it reached the king’s palace. The king of Kosala, Pasenadi, heard that the renunciant Gotama had spoken like this, “Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.” He told Queen Mallikā, “I hear that the renunciant Gotama has said, ‘Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.’” Hearing this, Queen Mallikā said, “It is like this, Great King; it is like this, Great King. Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.” King Pasenadi of Kosala said to Queen Mallikā: Hearing the explanations of the teacher, the disciple will certainly agree. The renunciant Gotama is your teacher, therefore you speak like this. You are his disciple, therefore you speak like this, “Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.” Queen Mallikā said, “Great King, if you do not believe it, you can go and ask him yourself, or you can send a messenger.”^389 Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, told the brahmin Nāḷijaṅgha: Go to the renunciant Gotama and on my behalf ask the renunciant Gotama if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free of ail ments, and if he is dwelling at ease with his usual vigor. Speak like this: “King Pasenadi of Kosala inquires if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable, and free of ailments. Is he dwelling at ease with his usual vigor?” [Then ask him,] “Did the renunciant Gotama really speak like this: ‘Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation’?” Nāḷijaṅgha, whatever the renunciant Gotama says to this, you should receive and remember well. Why is that? Such a person would never speak falsehood.

The brahmin Nāḷijaṅgha, having received the king’s order, went to the Buddha. Having exchanged greetings, he stepped back and sat to one side. He said:

Gotama, King Pasenadi of Kosala, inquires if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free from ailments. Is he dwelling at ease with his usual vigor? Has the renunciant Gotama really spoken like this, “Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation”? The World-honored One said: Nāḷijaṅgha, let me ask you something. Answer according to your under standing. What do you think, Nāḷijaṅgha? Suppose there is a person whose mother has died and he has become deranged.^390 His mind being greatly troubled, he tears off his clothes and walks naked around the streets, speak ing like this, “Friends, have you seen my mother? Friends, have you seen my mother?” Nāḷijaṅgha, on the basis of this case one can know that whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation. It is the same when a person’s father... brother... older sister... younger sister... daughter-in-law dies and he becomes deranged. His mind being greatly troubled, he tears off his clothes and walks naked around the streets, speaking like this, “Friends, have you seen my daugh ter-in-law? Friends, have you seen my daughter-in-law?” Nāḷijaṅgha, on the basis of this case one can know that whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation. Nāḷijaṅgha, formerly there was a man whose wife temporarily returned to her family. Her relatives wanted to force her to remarry. When the woman learned of this, she quickly returned to her husband’s house and told her hus band, “My lord, you should know that my relatives now want to force me to marry another man. What are we to do?” Then that man took the woman by the arm and led her inside. He spoke like this, “Together we will attain the next world. Together we will attain the next world.” Then he took a sharp knife and killed his wife and himself. Nāḷijaṅgha, on the basis of this case one can know that whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.

The brahmin Nāḷijaṅgha, hearing what the Buddha said, received and remembered it well. He rose from his seat, circumambulated [the Buddha] three times, and left. Returning to King Pasenadi of Kosala, he said:

Your Majesty, the renunciant Gotama indeed spoke like this: “Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.”^391 Hearing this, King Pasenadi of Kosala told Queen Mallikā, “The renunciant Gotama indeed spoke like this: ‘Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.’” Queen Mallikā said: Great King, let me ask the Great King something. Answer according to your understanding. What do you think? Does the king feel affection for [his son], General Viḍūḍabha? He answered, “Yes, I truly feel affection [for him].” Mallikā asked further, “If something untoward were to happen to General Viḍūḍabha, how would the king feel about that?” He answered: Mallikā, if something untoward were to happen to General Viḍūḍabha, I would certainly feel grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation. Mallikā said, “On the basis of this case, one can know this: ‘Whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.’” Mallikā asked further: Does the king feel affection for his senior minister Sirivaḍḍha... feel affection for his [royal] elephant Ekapuṇḍarīka... feel affection for [his only] daughter Vajīrī... feel affection for [his other wife] Vāsabhā... feel affection for [his realms of] Kāsi and Kosala?^392 He answered, “Yes, I truly feel affection [for them].” Mallikā asked again, “If something untoward were to happen to Kāsi and Kosala, how would the king feel about that?”

He answered: Mallikā, all of the five strands of sensual pleasure that I am endowed with and enjoy derive from these two realms. If something untoward were to happen to Kāsi and Kosala, I would even be without livelihood. How, then, could I not give rise to grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation? Mallikā said, “On the basis of this case, one can know that whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.” Mallikā asked the king further, “What do you think? Do you feel affection for me?” Again the king answered, “Yes, I truly feel affection for you.” Mallikā asked again, “If one day something untoward were to happen to me, how would the king feel about that?” He answered, “Mallikā, if one day something untoward were to happen to you, I would certainly feel grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.” Mallikā said, “On the basis of this case, one can know that whenever affection arises, there arise grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, depression, and vexation.” King Pasenadi of Kosala, said: Mallikā, from this day on, because of this, the renunciant Gotama is my teacher, and I am his disciple. Mallikā, I now take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of bhikkhus. May the World-honored One receive me as a lay disciple, from this day on until the end of life. I take refuge [in him] for my whole life.^393 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, King Pasenadi of Kosala and Queen Mallikā were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma216-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA13.3]] | M i 63 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA216]]
> ◄  [[ma215-bdk]] 📜  [[ma217-bdk]] ►
