---
sutta_code: "MA221"
sutta_title:
  - "箭喻 "
  - "Simile of the Arrow"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA221]]
> ◄  [[ma220-bdk]] 📜  [[ma222-bdk]] ►

### 221. The Discourse with the Simile of the Arrow

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the venerable Māluṅkyāputta had gone to a secluded place to meditate. He had this thought in his mind:

There are these views, namely, “the world is eternal,” “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” The World-honored One has abandoned these views, set them aside, not made an exhaustive statement on them. I do not like that; I cannot bear that; I do not approve of that. If the World-honored One definitely affirms to me “the world is eternal,” then I will train in the holy life under him. If the World-honored One does not definitely affirm to me “the world is eternal,” then, after closely ques tioning him, I will give up [the holy life] and leave. It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata

neither exists nor does not exist after death.” If the World-honored One definitely affirms to me, “this is true and anything else is false,” then I will train in the holy life under him. If the World-honored One does not definitely affirm to me, “this is true and anything else is false,” then, after closely questioning him, I will give up [the holy life] and leave. Then the venerable Māluṅkyāputta rose from his meditation seat in the late afternoon and approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with his head at [the Buddha’s] feet, he stepped back, sat to one side, and said:

World-honored One, I had gone to a secluded spot to meditate and had this thought in my mind: “There are these views, namely, ‘the world is eternal,’ ‘the world is not eternal’; ‘the world is finite,’ ‘the world is infi- nite’; ‘the life-force is the same as the body,’ ‘the life-force is different from the body’; ‘the Tathāgata exists after death,’ ‘the Tathāgata does not exist after death,’ ‘the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,’ ‘the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.’ The World- honored One has abandoned these views, set them aside, not made an exhaustive statement on them. I do not like that; I cannot bear that; I do not approve of that. “If the World-honored One definitely knows that the world is eternal, then let the World-honored One tell me so! If the World-honored One definitely does not know that the world is eternal, then let him say directly that he does not know it! “It is the same with ‘the world is not eternal’; ‘the world is finite,’ ‘the world is infinite’; ‘the life force is the same as the body,’ ‘the life-force is different from the body’; ‘the Tathāgata exists after death,’ ‘the Tathāgata does not exist after death,’ ‘the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,’ ‘the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.’ “If the World-honored One definitely knows ‘this is true and anything else is false,’ then let the World-honored One tell me so! If the World- honored One does not know ‘this is true and anything else is false,’ then let him say directly that he does not know it!”^405 The World-honored One asked, “Māluṅkyāputta, have I ever said to you, ‘Come and train in the holy life under me, and I will tell you that ‘the world is eternal’?”

Mālunkyāputta answered, “No, World-honored One.” [The World-honored One said:] It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” Have I ever said to you, “Come and train in the holy life under me, and I will tell you that this is true and anything else is false”? Māluṅkyāputta answered: “No, World-honored One.” [The World-honored One said:] Māluṅkyāputta, have you ever said to me “I will train in the holy life under the World-honored One if the World-honored One definitely affirms to me ‘the world is eternal’”? Māluṅkyāputta answered, “No, World-honored One.” [The World-honored One said:] It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathā- gata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” Have you ever said to me, “I will train in the holy life under the World-honored One if the World-honored One definitely affirms to me that this is true and anything else is false”? Māluṅkyāputta answered, “No, World-honored One.” The World-honored One said: Māluṅkyāputta, so I have never said these things to you and you also have never said them to me. You foolish man! Why misrepresent me with what is vain? At this, having been rebuked to his face by the World-honored One, the venerable Māluṅkyāputta was sad and depressed. He hung his head in silence, being unable to reply, as if immersed in thought.

At this the World-honored One, having rebuked Māluṅkyāputta to his face, told the bhikkhus: If some foolish person thinks like this: “Unless the World-honored One definitely affirms to me ‘the world is eternal,’ I will not train in the holy life under the World-honored One,” then this foolish person will never attain understanding, and in the meantime he will die. It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” If some foolish person thinks like this: “Unless the World-honored One definitely affirms to me that this is true and anything else is false, I will not train in the holy life under the World-honored One,” then this foolish person will never attain understanding, and in the meantime he will die. He is just like a man whose body has been wounded by a poisoned arrow and who, because of this poisoned arrow, is suffering extreme pain. He sees that his kinsmen and relatives, out of sympathy and concern about the wound and seeking his benefit and well-being, have called a surgeon to deal with the arrow. But the [wounded] man thinks, “The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn the family name and personal name of the person [who shot the arrow], [I must learn] if he is tall or short, stout or slim, of dark or light complexion or neither dark nor light, if he is from the warrior, brahmin, merchant, or worker caste, if he is from the east, south, west, or north. “The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn if the bow was made of wood from the thorny cudrania tree, from the mulberry tree, from the zelkova tree, or from horn. The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn if the bow grip was made from ox sinew, or deer sinew, or silk. The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn if the color of the bow was black, white, red, or yellow. The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn if the bowstring was made from sinew, silk, ramie, or hemp. The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn if the shaft of the arrow was made from wood or from bamboo.

“The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn if the string used for the fletching was made from ox sinew, deer sinew, or silk. The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn if the feather used for the fletching was that of a _piaofang_ bird, a vulture, a _kunji_ bird, or a crane. The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn if the arrowhead is long and pointed, barbed on one side, or barbed on both sides. The arrow cannot be pulled out yet. I must first learn the family name and personal name of the smith who made the arrowhead, and if he is tall or short, stout or slender, of dark or light complexion or neither dark nor light, if he is from the warrior, brahmin, merchant, or worker caste, if he is from the east, south, west, or north.” This person [who thinks thus] will never get to know [all this], and in the meantime he will die. If some foolish person thinks like this, “Unless the World-honored One definitely affirms to me ‘the world is eternal,’ I will not train in the holy life under the World-honored One,” then this foolish person will never attain understanding, and in the meantime he will die. It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” If some foolish person thinks like this, “Unless the World-honored One definitely affirms to me that this is true and anything else is false, I will not train in the holy life under the World-honored One,” then this foolish person will never attain understanding, and in the meantime he will die. To train in the holy life under me because of holding the view “the world is eternal”—that is not how it should be. It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” To train in the holy life under me because of holding these views—that is not how it should be.

Not to train in the holy life under me because of holding the view “the world is eternal”—that is not how it should be. It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathā gata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathā gata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” Not to train in the holy life under me because of holding these views—that is not how it should be. To train in the holy life under me because of not holding the view “the world is eternal”—that is not how it should be. It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathā gata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathā gata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” To train in the holy life under me because of not holding these views—that is not how it should be. [Not] to train in the holy life under me because of not holding the view “the world is eternal”—that is not how it should be. It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” Not to train in the holy life under me because of not holding these views—that is not how it should be. If “the world is eternal,” there still is birth, old age, disease, death, sor row, lamentation, grief, and vexation. In this way this whole great mass of dukkha arises. It is the same if “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathāgata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” There still is birth, old age, disease, death, sor row, lamentation, sorrow, pain, and vexation. In this way this whole great mass of dukkha arises.

“The world is eternal.” I have not definitely declared this. Why have I not definitely declared this? It is not connected with the purpose [of my teaching], it is not connected with the teaching [itself], it is not the root of the holy life; it does not lead to wisdom, it does not lead to awakening, it does not lead to nirvana. Therefore I have not definitely declared it. It is the same with “the world is not eternal”; “the world is finite,” “the world is infinite”; “the life-force is the same as the body,” “the life-force is different from the body”; “the Tathāgata exists after death,” “the Tathā- gata does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,” “the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.” I have not definitely declared this. Why have I not definitely declared this? It is not connected with the purpose [of my teaching], it is not connected with the teaching [itself], it is not the root of the holy life; it does not lead to wisdom, it does not lead to awakening, it does not lead to nirvana. Therefore I have not definitely declared it. What are the teachings that I have definitely declared? I have definitely declared _dukkha,_ the arising of _dukkha,_ the cessation of _dukkha,_ and the path to the cessation of _dukkha._ This I have definitely declared. And why have I definitely declared this? It is connected with the purpose [of my teaching], it is connected with the teaching [itself], it is the root of the holy life; it leads to wisdom, it leads to awakening, it leads to nirvana. Therefore I have definitely declared it. Thus, I do not declare what should not be declared and I declare what should be declared. You should remem- ber this and train yourselves accordingly. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma221-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.107]], [[MN148]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.24]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA221]]
> ◄  [[ma220-bdk]] 📜  [[ma222-bdk]] ►
