---
sutta_code: "MA24"
sutta_title:
  - "Ānāpānassati Sutta "
  - "Mindfulness of Breathing"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA24]]
> ◄  [[ma23-bdk]] 📜  [[ma25-bdk]] ►

### 24. The Discourse on the “Lion’s Roar” of Sāriputta

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time, the World-honored One was accompanied by a great assem bly of bhikkhus, who were observing the rains retreat at Sāvatthī. Venerable Sāriputta was also observing the rains retreat at Sāvatthī. At the end of the three-months’ rains retreat at Sāvatthī, Venerable Sāriputta, having mended his robes, took his robes and bowl and approached the Buddha. Having paid homage at [the Buddha’s] feet, he sat down to one side and addressed him: “World-honored One, I have completed the rains retreat at Sāvatthī, and now I wish to journey among the people.” The World-honored One replied: Sāriputta, go as you please, so that you may deliver those who have not yet won deliverance, liberate those who have not yet attained lib eration, and [lead to] final nirvana those who have not yet achieved final nirvana. Sāriputta, go as you please. Thereupon, Venerable Sāriputta, having heard what the Buddha said, received and remembered it well, rose from his seat, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and returned to his quarters. Having stored away his bedding and seat, he put on his robe and took his bowl and set out to journey among the people. Not long after the venerable Sāriputta had left, a certain companion in the holy life [alleged], before the Buddha, a breach of the precepts, a con travention of the Dharma, saying to the World-honored One: “Venerable Sāriputta slighted me today, just before he set out to journey among the peo ple.” Hearing this, the World-honored One told one of the bhikkhus: Go to Sāriputta and tell him: “The World-honored One calls you. Not long after you set out, a certain companion in the holy life [alleged], before me, a breach of the precepts, a contravention of the Dharma, saying: ‘World-honored One, Venerable Sāriputta slighted me today, just before he set out to journey among the people.’”

Having received this order, that monk rose from his seat, paid homage to the Buddha, and set out. At that time, Venerable Ānanda was standing behind the World-honored One, fanning him. Not long after that monk had set out, Venerable Ānanda went, with keys in hand, to all of the [bhikkhus’] quarters. He told all the bhikkhus he encountered:

It would be good, venerable sirs, if you would come to the assembly hall right away. Venerable Sāriputta will soon roar a lion’s roar before the Buddha. It may be that Venerable Sāriputta will make a profound proclamation about that which is most peaceful and sublime. If he makes such a proclamation, you, venerable sirs, and I, having heard it, should later recite and memorize it well. Then, on hearing what Venerable Ānanda said, all the bhikkhus went to the assembly hall. At that time, the monk [sent by the Buddha] approached Venerable Sāriputta and said:

The World-honored One calls you. Not long after you set out, a certain companion in the holy life [alleged], before the Buddha, a breach of the precepts, a contravention of the Dharma, saying: “World-honored One, Venerable Sāriputta slighted me today, just before he set out to journey among the people.” On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta rose from his seat and returned to where the Buddha was. Having paid homage at his feet, Sāriputta sat down to one side. The Buddha said: Sāriputta, not long after you set out, a certain companion in the holy life [alleged], before me, a breach of the precepts, a contravention of the Dharma, saying: “World-honored One, the venerable Sāriputta slighted me today just before he set out to journey among the people.” Sāriputta, did you really slight a companion in the holy life just before you set out to journey among the people? Venerable Sāriputta said: World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in

regard to the body, might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as a de-horned ox that is patient and docile, being thoroughly tamed, causes no harm wherever it goes, whether from village to village or from street to street. I, World-honored One, am like this, having a mind like a de-horned ox. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind] boundless, exalted, immeasurable and well cul tivated. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body, might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as a son of an outcaste whose two hands have been cut off, being utterly humbled, causes no harm wherever he goes, whether from village to village or from town to town. I, World honored One, am like this; my mind is like the son of an outcaste whose two hands have been cut off. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as the earth receives what is pure and what is impure, excrement, urine, snot, and spittle, without for this reason hating it or liking it, without feeling embarrassed, ashamed, or humiliated. I, World-honored One, am like this; my mind is like the

earth. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World- honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as water washes away what is pure and what is impure, excrement, urine, snot, and spittle, without for this reason hating it or liking it, without feeling embarrassed, ashamed, or humiliated. I, World-honored One, am like this; my mind is like that water. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World- honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as fire burns up what is pure and what is impure, excrement, urine, snot, and spittle, without for this rea- son hating it or liking it, without feeling embarrassed, ashamed, or humiliated. I, World-honored One, am like this; my mind is like that fire. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World- honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people?

World-honored One, it is just as the wind blows away what is pure and what is impure, excrement, urine, snot, and spittle, without for this reason hating it or liking it, without feeling embarrassed, ashamed, or humiliated. I, World-honored One, am like this; my mind is like the wind. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as a broom sweeps away what is pure and what is impure, excrement, urine, snot, and spittle, without for this reason hating it or liking it, without feeling embarrassed, ashamed, or humiliated. World-honored One, I am like this; my mind is like a broom. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] bound less, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as a cleaning rag wipes away what is pure and what is impure, excrement, urine, snot, and spittle, without for this reason hating it or liking it, without feeling ashamed, or humil iated. World-honored One, I am like this; my mind is like a cleaning rag. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life

just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World- honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as, when a jug with many cracks has been filled to the brim with grease and placed in the sun, the grease leaks and oozes out everywhere. If a man with [good] eyesight comes and stands beside it, he sees this jug of grease with many cracks, which has been filled to the brim and placed in the sun; and he sees the grease leaking and oozing out everywhere. World-honored One, I too, am like this. I constantly contemplate the impurity of this body with its nine orifices leaking and oozing out everywhere. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World- honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people? World-honored One, it is just as a joyful youth might bathe and perfume himself with fragrances, put on white, clean clothes, and adorn himself with jewels; and having shaved his beard and arranged his hair, might place flowers on his head. Suppose that three kinds of corpse are then garlanded around his neck—a dead snake, a dead dog, and a dead human being, discolored, bloated, foul-smelling, rotten, and oozing putrid fluids. That youth would feel embarrassed and ashamed and filled with utter disgust. World-honored One, I am like this. As I constantly contemplate the foul and impure parts of this body, my mind is embarrassed and ashamed and filled with utter disgust. World-honored One, someone who lacks mindfulness of the body in regard to the body might well slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people. I, however, World- honored One, am well equipped with mindfulness of the body in regard to the body. How could I slight a companion in the holy life just before setting out to journey among the people?

Thereupon, that monk [who had accused Sāriputta] rose from his seat, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, and said to him: I repent my transgression, World-honored One; I confess, Well-gone One, [to acting] like a fool, like an idiot, like [one who is] confused, like [one who is] unwholesome. Why so? Because I falsely slandered the monk Sāriputta, my pure companion in the holy life. World-honored One, I now repent, hoping that this will be accepted. Having seen [my transgression] and acknowledged it, I will not repeat it. The World-honored One said: So it is, monk. You have indeed [acted] like a fool, like an idiot, like [one who is] confused, like [one who is] unwholesome. Why so? Because you falsely slandered the monk Sāriputta, your pure companion in the holy life. Yet you have been able to repent your transgression, and, having seen and acknowledged it, you will not repeat it. Those who are able to repent their transgression, having seen it and acknowl edged it, and will not repeat it, come, in this way, to growth in the noble teaching and discipline, and will not regress. Then the Buddha told Venerable Sāriputta: “Accept that foolish man’s expression of remorse quickly, lest the head of this monk split into seven parts right away in front of you.” Venerable Sāriputta, out of compassion, accepted that monk’s expression of remorse. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Ven erable Sāriputta and the [other] bhikkhus, were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA37.6]] | M iii 78 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA24]]
> ◄  [[ma23-bdk]] 📜  [[ma25-bdk]] ►
