---
sutta_code: "MA27"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṅkhārupapatti Sutta "
  - "Rebirth by Choice"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA27]]
> ◄  [[ma26-bdk]] 📜  [[ma28-bdk]] ►

### 27. The Discourse to Dhānañjāni

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary, where he was observing the rains

retreat together with a great assembly of bhikkhus. At that time, Venerable Sāriputta was in Sāvatthī, also observing the rains retreat. At that time a certain monk who, after having completed the three-month rains retreat at Rājagaha, and having mended his robes, put on his robe and took his bowl, and left Rājagaha for Sāvatthī, to stay in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. That monk approached Venerable Sāriputta and, having paid homage at his feet, sat down to one side. Venerable Sāriputta asked: “Where have you come from, venerable friend? Where did you observe the rains retreat?” The monk replied: “Venerable Sāriputta, I have come from Rājagaha. I observed the rains retreat at Rājagaha.” [Sāriputta] asked further: Venerable friend, as for the World-honored One, who has been observ- ing the rains retreat at Rājagaha, is he healthy and strong? Is he com- fortable and free from ailments? Is he dwelling at ease, and is his vigor as usual? The monk replied: Yes, Venerable Sāriputta. The World-honored One, who has been observing the rains retreat at Rājagaha, is healthy and strong, he is comfortable and free from ailments, he is dwelling at ease and his vigor is as usual. [Sāriputta] asked further: Venerable friend, as for the bhikkhus and nuns who have been observing the rains retreat at Rājagaha, are they healthy and strong? Are they comfortable and free from ailments? Are they dwelling at ease, and is their vigor as usual? Do they wish to see the Buddha often and do they delight in hearing the Dharma? [That monk] replied: Yes, Venerable Sāriputta. The bhikkhus and nuns who have been observing the rains retreat at Rājagaha are healthy and strong, they are comfortable and free from ailments, they are dwelling at ease and their vigor is as

usual. They wish to see the Buddha often, and they delight in hearing the Dharma. [Sāriputta] asked further: Venerable friend, as for the male and female lay followers who live in Rājagaha, are they healthy and strong? Are they comfortable and free from ailments? Are they dwelling at ease and is their vigor as usual? Do they wish to see the Buddha often and do they delight in hearing the Dharma? [That monk] replied: Yes, Venerable Sāriputta. The male and female lay followers who live in Rājagaha are healthy and strong, they are comfortable and free from ailments, they are also dwelling at ease and their vigor is as usual. They wish to see the Buddha often, and they delight in hearing the Dharma. [Sāriputta] asked further: Venerable friend, as for the various non-Buddhist renunciants and brah- mins who have been observing the rains retreat at Rājagaha, are they healthy and strong? Are they comfortable and free from ailments? Are they dwelling at ease and is their vigor as usual? Do they wish to see the Buddha often and do they delight in hearing the Dharma? [That monk] replied: Yes, Venerable Sāriputta. The various non-Buddhist renunciants and brahmins who have been observing the rains retreat at Rājagaha are healthy and strong, they are comfortable and free from ailments, they are dwelling at ease, and their vigor is as usual. They wish to see the Buddha often and they delight in hearing the Dharma. [Sāriputta] asked further: “Venerable friend, there is at Rājagaha a brah- min named Dhānañjāni. He was a friend of mine before I went forth as a monk. Do you know him?” [That monk] replied: “I do know him.” [Sāriputta] asked further:

Venerable friend, as for this brahmin Dhānañjāni from Rājagaha, is he healthy and strong? Is he comfortable and free from ailments? Is he dwelling at ease and is his vigor as usual? Does he wish to see the Buddha often and does he delight in hearing the Dharma? [That monk] replied: Venerable Sāriputta, the brahmin Dhānañjāni from Rājagaha is healthy and strong, he is comfortable and free from ailments, he is dwelling at ease, and his vigor is as usual. [However,] he does not wish to see the Buddha, nor does he delight in hearing the Dharma. Why is that? Venerable Sāriputta, the brahmin Dhānañjāni has not been making efforts and has been transgressing against the moral pre- cepts. Relying on his standing with the king, he defrauds the brahmins and householders; and relying on his standing with the brahmins and householders, he defrauds the king. Hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta, having completed the three-month rains retreat at Sāvatthī and having mended his robes, put on his robe and took his bowl and left Sāvatthī for Rājagaha, where he stayed in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. Then in the morning, after spending the night there, Venerable Sāriputta put on his robes, took his bowl, and went into Rājagaha to beg for food, going from door to door. Having begged for food, he went to the house of the brahmin Dhānañjāni. At that time, the brahmin Dhānañjāni had come out of his house, and was by the side of a spring, harshly punishing some local residents. Seeing Venerable Sāriputta approaching in the distance, the brahmin Dhānañjāni rose from his seat, bared his [right] shoulder, placing his palms together [in respect] toward Venerable Sāriputta, and expressed his joy: “Wel- come, Sāriputta! It has been a long time since you came here, Sāriputta.” Then, respectfully taking Venerable Sāriputta by the arm, the brahmin Dhā- nañjāni led him into his house. He prepared a fine seat and invited Sāriputta to sit down. Venerable Sāriputta then sat on that seat. When the brahmin Dhānañjāni saw that Venerable Sāriputta was seated, he brought him a golden bowl^106 to wash [his hands] and invited him to take a meal. Venerable Sāriputta said: “Enough, enough, Dhānañjāni, put your mind at ease.”

A second and a third time the brahmin Dhānañjāni repeated his invitation, and a second and a third time Venerable Sāriputta declined, saying: “Enough, enough, Dhānañjāni, put your mind at ease.” Then the brahmin Dhānañjāni asked: “Sāriputta, why enter the house like this and then refuse to eat?” Venerable Sāriputta replied: Dhānañjāni, [I hear that] you have not been making efforts and have been transgressing against the moral precepts. Relying on your standing with the king, you defraud the brahmins and householders, and relying on your standing with the brahmins and householders, you defraud the king. The brahmin Dhānañjāni replied: Sāriputta, know that, being at present a householder, I have to manage my household affairs. I have to see to my own comfort and well-being, support my parents, look after my wife and children, provide for my male and female servants,^107 pay taxes to the king, perform rituals for the deities, make offerings to my departed ancestors, and give to renun ciants and brahmins—in order to live long and later be reborn in heaven and obtain pleasant karmic fruits. Sāriputta, all these affairs cannot be neglected,^108 being dictated by [customary] law. Then Venerable Sāriputta said: Dhānañjāni, let me ask you a question. Answer as best you can. What do you think, Dhānañjāni? Suppose that someone does evil for the sake of his parents. Having done evil, he goes, at the breaking up of the body at death, to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. Once reborn in hell, he is dragged off by the wardens of hell to undergo harsh punishment. He pleads with the wardens of hell: “Wardens of hell, let me tell you! Don’t punish me! Why? Because I did evil only for the sake of my parents.” What do you think, Dhānañjāni, will that person be able to escape punishment by the wardens of hell [by pleading so]? [Dhānañjāni] replied: “No.” Venerable Sāriputta asked further:

What do you think, Dhānañjāni? Suppose, again, that someone does evil for the sake of his wife and children. Having done evil, he goes, at the breaking up of the body at death, to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. Once reborn in hell, he is dragged off by the war dens of hell to undergo harsh punishment. He pleads with the wardens of hell: “Wardens of hell, let me tell you! Don’t punish me! Why? Because I did evil only for the sake of my wife and children.” What do you think, Dhānañjāni, will that person be able to escape punishment by the wardens of hell [by pleading so]?

Dhānañjāni replied: “No.” [Sāriputta] asked further:

What do you think, Dhānañjāni? Suppose, again, that someone does evil for the sake of his servants. Having done evil, he goes, at the break ing up of the body at death, to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. Once reborn in hell, he is dragged off by the wardens of hell to undergo harsh punishment. He pleads with the wardens of hell: “Wardens of hell, let me tell you! Don’t punish me! Why? Because I did evil only for the sake of my male and female servants.” What do you think, Dhānañjāni, will that person be able to escape punishment by the wardens of hell [by pleading so]?

Dhānañjāni replied: “No.” [Sāriputta] asked further:

What do you think, Dhānañjāni? Suppose, again, that someone does evil for the sake of the king, deities, departed ancestors, and renunciants and brahmins. Having done evil, he goes, at the breaking up of the body at death, to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. Once reborn in hell, he is dragged off by the wardens of hell to undergo harsh punishment. He pleads with the wardens of hell: “Wardens of hell, let me tell you! Don’t punish me! Why? Because I did evil only for the sake of the king, deities, departed ancestors, and renunciants and brah mins.” What do you think, Dhānañjāni, will that person be able to escape punishment by the wardens of hell [by pleading so]?

Dhānañjāni replied: “No.”

[Sāriputta said:] Dhānañjāni, a clansman can gain wealth by means that are in accordance with the Dharma, in accordance with [creating good] karma, and in accordance with virtue, in order to honor, respect, and support his par ents, thus performing meritorious acts and abstaining from unwhole some acts. Dhānañjāni, if a clansman gains wealth by means that are in accordance with the Dharma, in accordance with [creating good] karma, and in accordance with virtue, in order to honor, respect, and support his parents, thus performing meritorious acts and abstaining from unwholesome acts—he is thought of fondly by his parents, who say: “May you have good health and long life! Why [do we say this]? Because thanks to you, we have peace and happiness.” Dhānañjāni, for one who is thus thought of fondly by his parents, merits increase daily and do not decline. Dhānañjāni, a clansman can gain wealth by means that are in accordance with the Dharma, in accordance with [creating good] karma, and in accordance with virtue, in order to lovingly take care of his wife and children and look after their well-being, thus performing meritorious acts and abstaining from unwholesome acts. Dhānañjāni, if a clansman gains wealth by means that are in accordance with the Dharma, in accor dance with [good] karma, and in accordance with virtue, in order to lovingly take care of his wife and children and look after their well being, thus performing meritorious acts and abstaining from unwhole some acts—then he is honored and respected by his wife and children, who say: “Your honor, may you have good health and long life! Why [do I say this]? Because thanks to you, I have well-being and happiness.” Dhānañjāni, for one who is thus honored and respected by his wife and children, merits increase daily and do not decline. Dhānañjāni, a clansman can gain wealth by means that are in accordance with the Dharma, in accordance with [good] karma, and in accordance with virtue, in order to lovingly take care of his male and female servants and look after their well-being, thus performing meritorious acts and abstaining from unwholesome acts. Dhānañjāni, if a clansman gains wealth by means that are in accordance with the

Dharma, in accordance with [good] karma, and in accordance with virtue, in order to compassionately provide for his servants and look after their well-being, thus performing meritorious acts and abstaining from unwholesome acts—then he is honored and respected by his ser- vants, who say: “Master, may you have good health and long life! Why [do we say this]? Because thanks to you, we have well-being.” Dhā- nañjāni, for one who is thus honored and respected by his servants, merits increase daily and do not decline. Dhānañjāni, a clansman can gain wealth by means that are in accor- dance with the Dharma, in accordance with [good] karma, and in accor- dance with virtue, in order to honor and support renunciants and brah- mins, thus performing meritorious acts and abstaining from unwholesome acts. Dhānañjāni, if a clansman gains wealth by means that are in accor- dance with the Dharma, in accordance with [good] karma, and in accor- dance with virtue, in order to honor and support renunciants and brah- mins, thus performing meritorious acts and abstaining from un wholesome acts—then he is thought of fondly by renunciants and brahmins, who say: “Donor, may you have good health and long life! Why [do we say this]? Because thanks to you, we have well-being and happiness.” Dhā- nañjāni, for one who is thus thought of fondly by renunciants and brah- mins, merits increase daily and do not decline. Thereupon, the brahmin Dhānañjāni rose from his seat, bared his right shoulder, placed his palms together [in respect] toward Venerable Sāriputta, and said:

Sāriputta, I have a wife named Beautiful, whom I dote on. Through having been deluded by her, I have become negligent and undertaken many evil deeds. Sāriputta, from today onward, I will detach myself from my wife Beautiful and [instead] take refuge in you, Venerable Sāriputta. Venerable Sāriputta replied: “Dhānañjāni, do not take refuge in me. You should take refuge in the Buddha, in whom I myself take refuge.” The brahmin Dhānañjāni proclaimed: Venerable Sāriputta, from this day on, I take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of bhikkhus. May Venerable Sāriputta

accept me as a lay follower of the Buddha, having taken refuge for life, until death. Then Venerable Sāriputta taught the Dharma to the brahmin Dhānañjāni. Exhorting, encouraging, and delighting him, Sāriputta employed countless skillful means to teach the Dharma. Having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted [Dhānañjāni], [Sāriputta] rose from his seat and left for Rājagaha. After staying there several days, [Sāriputta] put on his robe and took his bowl and left Rājagaha for the Southern Mountains. He stayed in a rosewood grove, [located] north of a village in the Southern Mountains. At that time, a certain monk who was staying at Rājagaha, after having stayed there for several days, put on his robe and took his bowl and [also] left Rājagaha for the Southern Mountains. He [too] stayed in the rosewood grove, [located] north of a village in the Southern Mountains. Then that monk approached Venerable Sāriputta and, having paid homage at his feet, sat down to one side. Venerable Sāriputta asked: “Venerable friend, where have you come from? Where have you been staying?” That monk replied: “Venerable Sāriputta, I have come from Rājagaha. I was staying at Rājagaha.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Venerable friend, in Rājagaha there is a brah- min named Dhānañjāni, a friend of mine from before I went forth as a monk. Do you know him?” The monk replied: “I know him.” [Sāriputta] asked further: Venerable friend, as for this brahmin Dhānañjāni who lives in Rājagaha, is he healthy and strong? Is he comfortable and free from ailments? Is he dwelling at ease and is his vigor as usual? Does he wish to see the Buddha often and does he delight in hearing the Dharma? The monk replied: Venerable Sāriputta, the brahmin Dhānañjāni wishes to see the Buddha often and he wishes to hear the Dharma often. However, he is not well and his vigor is diminishing. Why is that?

Venerable Sāriputta, the brahmin Dhānañjāni is currently afflicted with an ailment. He is seriously ill and in a critical condition and there- fore could die [soon]. Having heard this, Venerable Sāriputta put on his robe and took his bowl, and left the Southern Mountains for Rājagaha, [where] he stayed in the Bam- boo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. Having passed the night there, at dawn Venerable Sāriputta, putting on his robe and taking his bowl, headed for the house of the brahmin Dhānañjāni. Seeing Venerable Sāriputta approaching in the distance, the brahmin Dhānañjāni struggled to get up from his bed. Seeing the brahmin Dhānañjāni struggling to get up from his bed, Venerable Sāriputta stopped him, saying: “Lie still, Dhānañjāni! Don’t get up! There is another bed here. I shall sit on it.” Then, having seated himself on the other bed, Venerable Sāriputta asked: “Dhānañjāni, how is your ailment now? How much are you eating and drink- ing? Is your illness subsiding, not increasing?” Dhānañjāni replied: My ailment is becoming critical. I cannot eat or drink. My illness is increasing, not subsiding. Venerable Sāriputta, I now have a headache so severe that it is as if a strong man were cutting my head open with a knife, causing extreme pain. Venerable Sāriputta, I now have a headache so severe that it is as if a strong man were constantly tightening a rope around my head, causing extreme pain. Venerable Sāriputta, I now have stomach pains so severe that it is as if a butcher were cutting it open, like the stomach of a live cow, with a sharp knife, causing extreme pain. Venerable Sāriputta, my entire body is in such pain that it is as if two strong men had seized a weak man and were roasting him over a fire, causing extreme pain. Such are the painful feelings I am experiencing; and they are increasing, not subsiding. Venerable Sāriputta said: Dhānañjāni, let me ask you a question. Answer as best you can. What do you think, brahmin Dhānañjāni? Which is the better, hell or the ani- mal [realm]?

Dhānañjāni answered: “The animal [realm] is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the animal [realm] or the [realm] of hungry ghosts?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The [realm] of hungry ghosts is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the [realm] of hungry ghosts or the [realm] of human beings?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The [realm] of human beings is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the [realm] of human beings or the heaven of the four kings?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The heaven of the kour kings is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the heaven of the four kings or the heaven of the thirty-three?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The heaven of the thirty-three is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the heaven of the thirty-three or the Yama heaven?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The Yama heaven is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the Yama heaven or the Tusita heaven?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The Tusita heaven is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the Tusita heaven or [the heaven] of the gods who delight in creating?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The heaven of the gods who delight in creating is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the heaven of the gods who delight in creating or the [heaven] of the gods who wield power over others’ creations?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The heaven of the gods who wield power over others’ creations is the better.” [Sāriputta] asked further: “Dhānañjāni, which is the better, the heaven of the gods who wield power over others’ creations or the Brahmā world?” Dhānañjāni answered: “The Brahmā world is supreme! The Brahmā world is supreme!” Venerable Sāriputta said: Dhānañjāni, the World-honored One, who is endowed with knowledge and vision, the Tathāgata, without attachment and fully awakened, has

taught four divine abidings. By practicing them again and again, a male or female lay follower can cut off sensual desire, relinquish thoughts related to sensual desire, and, with the breaking up of the body at death, will be reborn in the Brahmā world. What are the four? Dhānañjāni, here a learned noble disciple with his mind imbued with loving-kindness, dwells [mentally] pervading one direction, like- wise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions and also above and below, all around, every- where. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. Similarly, he imbues his mind with compassion, with empathic joy, with equanimity, and, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. This, Dhānañjāni, is the teaching of the four divine abidings that has been taught by the World-honored One, who is endowed with knowledge and vision, the Tathāgata, without attachment and fully awakened. By practicing [these four divine abidings] again and again, a male or female lay follower can eradicate sensual desire and relinquish thoughts related to sensual desire and, with the breaking up of the body at death, will be reborn in the Brahmā world. Having taught Dhānañjāni the teachings relating to the Brahmā world, Venerable Sāriputta rose from his seat and left. After Venerable Sāriputta had left Rājagaha and before he had reached the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary, while he was still in between [these two places], the brahmin Dhānañjāni, who had practiced the four divine abidings and had abandoned sensual desire and relinquished thoughts relating to sensual desire, with the breaking up of the body at death, was reborn in the Brahmā world. At that time, the World-honored One was giving teachings, surrounded by an immense following. Seeing Venerable Sāriputta approaching in the distance, the World-honored One told the bhikkhus [in the assembly]:

The monk Sāriputta is endowed with bright wisdom, quick wisdom, lively wisdom, keen wisdom, extensive wisdom, profound wisdom, wisdom that brings release, penetrative wisdom, eloquent wisdom. The monk Sāriputta has achieved genuine wisdom. This monk Sāriputta has just taught the brahmin Dhānañjāni a teaching on the Brahmā world. If he had taught him further, [Dhānañjāni] would have quickly realized the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. Then, Venerable Sāriputta approached the Buddha and, having paid homage at his feet, sat down to one side. The World-honored One said: Sāriputta, why did you not teach the brahmin Dhānañjāni the teaching on going beyond the Brahmā world? If you had taught him further, he would have quickly realized the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. Venerable Sāriputta replied: World-honored One, those brahmins have for a long time been attached to the Brahmā world, they delight in the Brahmā world, [take] the Brahmā world to be supreme, esteem the Brahmā world, [take] the Brahmā world to be [ultimately] real, and consider the Brahmā world as being for them. For these reasons, World-honored One, I acted according to [Dhānañjāni’s] wishes. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Ven erable Sāriputta and the assembly of countless hundreds of thousands of people were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma27-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M iii 99 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.15]], [[AN4.178]], [[MA152]], [[MN143]], [[MN99]], [[SN3.17]], [[SN41.10]], [[SN41.7]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA27]]
> ◄  [[ma26-bdk]] 📜  [[ma28-bdk]] ►
