---
sutta_code: "MA32"
sutta_title:
  - "未曾有法 "
  - "Extraordinary Qualities [of the Buddha"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA32]]
> ◄  [[ma31-bdk]] 📜  [[ma33-bdk]] ►

### 32. The Discourse on Extraordinary Qualities [of the Buddha]

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time, in the late afternoon, Venerable Ānanda rose from sitting in meditation and approached the Buddha. After paying respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, he stood to one side and said:

World-honored One, I have heard that at the time of Kassapa Buddha the World-honored One made his initial vow [to follow] the path [of becoming] a buddha and practiced the holy life. That at the time of Kassapa Buddha the World-honored One made his initial vow [to follow] the path [of becoming] a buddha and practiced the holy life, this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World honored One. I have heard that the World-honored One, having at the time of Kassapa Buddha made his initial vow [to follow] the path [of becom ing] a buddha and practiced the holy life, was reborn in the Tusita heaven. That the World-honored One, having at the time of Kassapa Buddha made his initial vow [to follow] the path [of becoming] a buddha and practiced the holy life, was reborn in the Tusita heaven, this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that the World-honored One, having at the time of Kassapa Buddha made his initial vow [to follow] the path [of becom ing] a buddha and, having practiced the holy life, was reborn in the Tusita heaven. The World-honored One surpassed all those who had previously been born in the Tusita heaven in three respects, namely in divine length of life, divine complexion, and divine glory. For this

reason, the Tusita gods were delighted and rejoiced, exclaiming: “This young god is most wonderful, most remarkable. He possesses great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power.” Why was this? [Because] he surpassed all those who had previously been born in the Tusita heaven in three respects, namely in divine length of life, divine complexion, and divine glory. That the World-honored One, who at the time of Kassapa Buddha had made his initial vow [to follow] the path [of becoming] a buddha, had practiced the holy life, and had been reborn in the Tusita heaven; that he surpassed all those who had previously been born in the Tusita heaven in three respects, namely in divine length of life, divine beauty, and divine glory; [that] for this reason the Tusita gods were delighted and rejoiced, exclaiming: “This young god is most wonderful, most remarkable. He possesses great supernormal power,^119 great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power”; [and that this was] because he surpassed all those who had previously been born in the Tusita heaven in three respects, namely in divine length of life, divine appear ance, and divine glory—[all] this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that at the end of his life span in the Tusita heaven, when the World-honored One mindfully descended into his mother’s womb, at that moment all of heaven and earth trembled and a great light illuminated the world, including even remote and dark places, unobstructed, completely shining on places that are not illuminated by the moon or the sun, even though these possess great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power; and because of this wonderful light, each and every sentient being came to know this: “A remarkable being will be born! A remarkable being will be born!” That at the end of his life span in the Tusita heaven, when the World honored One mindfully descended into his mother’s womb, at that moment all of heaven and earth trembled, and a great light illuminated the world, including even remote and dark places, unobstructed, com pletely shining on places that are not illuminated by the moon or the sun,

even though these possess great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power; and that because of this wonderful light, each and every sentient being came to know this: “A remarkable being will be born! A remarkable being will be born!”—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that, while in his mother’s womb, the World-honored One remained mindfully [lying] on his right side. That the World-honored One, while in his mother’s womb, remained mindfully [lying] on his right side, this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that the World-honored One dwelt in his mother’s womb peacefully and at ease. That the World-honored One dwelt in his mother’s womb peace- fully and at ease, this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that, while in his mother’s womb, the World-honored One was covered in such a way that he was not defiled by blood or semen or other impurities. That the World-honored One, while in his mother’s womb, was covered in such a way that he was not defiled by blood or semen or other impurities, this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that when the World-honored One mindfully came out from his mother’s womb, at that moment all of heaven and earth trembled and a great light illuminated the world, including even remote and dark places, unobstructed, completely shining on places that are not illuminated by the moon or the sun, even though these possess great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power; and because of this wonderful light, each and every sentient being came to know this: “A remarkable being has been born! A remarkable being has been born!” That when the World-honored One mindfully came out from his mother’s womb, at that moment all of heaven and earth trembled, and a great light illuminated the world, including even remote and dark places, unobstructed, completely shining on places that are not illuminated by the moon or the sun, even though these possess great supernormalpower,

great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power; and that because of this wonderful light, each and every sentient being came to know this: “A remarkable being has been born! A remarkable being has been born!”—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that the World-honored One came out from his mother’s womb peacefully and at ease. That the World-honored One came out from his mother’s womb peacefully and at ease, this I remem ber as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that, when he came out from his mother’s womb, the World-honored One was covered in such a way that he was not defiled by blood or semen or other impurities. That the World-honored One, when he came out from his mother’s womb, was covered in such a way that he was not defiled by blood or semen, or other impurities— this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that when the World-honored One was just born, four gods, holding extremely fine pieces of cloth, stood before his mother and delighted her by exclaiming: “This prince is most wonderful, most remarkable. He possesses great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power.” That when the World-honored One was just born, four gods holding extremely fine pieces of cloth stood before his mother and delighted her by exclaiming: “This prince is most wonderful, most remarkable. He possesses great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power”—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that when he was just born, the World-honored One immediately took seven steps and, without fear, trepidation, or appre hension, looked in all directions. That the World-honored One, when he was just born, immediately took seven steps and, without fear, trep idation, or apprehension, looked in all directions—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that when the World-honored One was just born, there appeared before his mother a large pond brimming with water, with which she was able to cleanse herself. That when the World-honored

One was just born, there appeared before his mother a large pond brim- ming with water, with which she was able to cleanse herself—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that when the World-honored One was just born, two streams of water, one cool and one warm, poured down from the sky to bathe the World-honored One’s body. That when the World-honored One was born, two streams of water, one cool and one warm, poured down from the sky to bathe the World-honored One’s body—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that when the World-honored One was just born, gods were drumming heavenly music in the sky and scattering over the World-honored One heavenly blue lotus blossoms, red lotus blossoms, scarlet lotus blossoms, white lotus blossoms, blossoms from the heav- enly coral tree, and fine sandalwood incense. That when the World-honored One was just born, gods were drum- ming heavenly music in the sky and scattering over the World-honored One heavenly blue lotus blossoms, red lotus blossoms, scarlet lotus blossoms, white lotus blossoms, blossoms from the heavenly coral tree, and fine sandalwood incense—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that at one time the World-honored One was at the palace of his father, King Suddhodana, who was supervising the farm- ing during the day. Seated beneath a rose-apple tree [the World-hon- ored One], separated from desires, separated from evil and unwhole- some states, with initial and sustained application of the mind, with joy and happiness born of separation, dwelled having attained the first jhāna. At that time, it being past noon, the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of that rose-apple tree alone had remained still, providing shade for the body of the World- honored One. At that time the Sakyan [chief] Suddhodana, who was supervising the farming, approached a worker and asked: “Worker, where is the prince?” The worker answered: “Your majesty, the prince is now under the rose-apple tree.”

Then the Sakyan Suddhodana went to the rose-apple tree. At that time the Sakyan Suddhodana saw that, it being past noon, the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of that rose-apple tree alone had remained still, providing shade for the body of the World honored One. Then he thought: Now, this prince is most wonderful, most remarkable, he possesses great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power. Why? Because, it being past noon, the shadows of all the other trees have moved, but the shadow of the rose-apple tree alone has remained still, providing shade for the prince’s body. World-honored One, that it being past noon the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of the rose-apple tree alone had remained still, providing shade for the body of the World-honored One—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that at one time the World-honored One was living in the Great Forest of Vesālī. At dawn, when the night was over, the World-honored One put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Vesālī to beg for food. Having finished begging for food [and eaten his meal], he put away his robes and bowl, washed his hands and feet, and, with a sitting mat on his shoulder, went into the forest. Arrived beneath a palm tree, he spread his sitting mat and sat down cross-legged. Then, when noon had passed, the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of that palm tree alone had remained still, providing shade for the body of the World-honored One. Then, the Sakyan Mahānāma, who was wandering around after midday, went into the Great Forest. He saw that, it being past noon, the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of that palm tree alone had remained still, providing shade for the body of the World-honored One. Then he thought: The renunciant Gotama is most wonderful, most remarkable. He possesses great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great

merit, great and mighty power. Why? Because, it being past noon, the shadows of all the other trees have moved, but the shadow of the palm tree alone has remained still, providing shade for the body of the renunciant Gotama.

World-honored One, that it being past noon the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of the palm tree alone had remained still, providing shade for the body of the World-honored One—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that at one time the World-honored One was living in the Great Forest of Vesālī. At that time the monks had placed the almsbowls outside on the ground and the bowl of the World-honored One was among them. Then a monkey came and made off with the Buddha’s bowl. The monks chided the monkey, afraid that it would break the Buddha’s bowl. The Buddha told the monks, “Stop! Stop! Don’t chide it. It will not break the bowl.” Then the monkey carried the Buddha’s bowl away and went to a _sāla_ tree. It slowly climbed the tree. Having reached the top of the _sāla_ tree, it took some honey and filled the bowl with it. Coming slowly down from the tree, it returned and approached the Buddha. It then respectfully offered the bowl of honey to the World-honored One, but the World-honored One did not accept it. Then that monkey retreated to one side, took a piece of stick, and removed some insects [from the honey in the bowl]. Having removed the insects, the monkey again offered [the bowl] to the Buddha. Again the Buddha did not accept it. The monkey again retreated to one side, added some water to the honey, and returned to offer it to the Buddha again. The World-honored One readily accepted it. Seeing that the Buddha had accepted the bowl of honey, the monkey was overjoyed. Dancing and whirling around, it departed. That the World-honored One, by accepting a bowl of honey, made that monkey rejoice, dance, and whirl around before departing—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One.

I have heard that at one time the World-honored One was staying in Vesālī at the Gabled Hall near Monkey Lake. At that time, the World-honored One was drying his sitting mat in the sun, shaking and cleaning it. Then a big untimely cloud came and covered the sky, and was about to pour down rain; but had to wait for the World-honored One. Having finished drying, shaking, and clean ing his sitting mat, and having put it aside in a certain place, the World honored One took a broom and went to the terrace of the house. On seeing that the World-honored One had put away the sitting mat, the big cloud began sending down torrential rain that flooded the highlands and lowlands. That the World-honored One caused that big cloud to hold back its heavy rain that was going to flood the highlands and lowlands, until it saw that the World-honored One had put away his sitting mat, this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that at one time the World-honored One was living among the Vajjīs, sitting under a royal sāla tree by the Hot Spring Grove. At that time, it being past noon, the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of that royal sāla tree alone had remained still, providing shade for the body of the World-honored One. At that time the owner of the Rāma Garden was inspecting the grove. He saw that, it being past noon, the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of the royal sāla tree alone had remained still, providing shade for the body of the World-honored One. Then he thought: The renunciant Gotama is most wonderful and most marvelous. He has great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power. Why? Because, it being past noon, the shadows of all the other trees have moved, but the shadow of the royal sāla tree alone has remained still, providing shade for the body of the renunciant Gotama. World-honored One, that noon having passed, the shadows of all the other trees had moved, but the shadow of the royal sāla tree alone had

remained still, providing shade for the body of the World-honored One— this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that at one time the World-honored One was staying at the Ātumā Shrine. At that time, at dawn, when the night was over, the World-honored One put on his robes, took his almsbowl, and entered the village of Ātumā to beg for food. Having finished begging for food [and eaten his meal], he put away his robes and bowl and washed his hands and feet. Carrying a sitting mat on his shoulder, he entered the shrine to meditate. At that time, there was a great thunderstorm with hail, which killed four cows and two farmers. During the [ensuing] funeral procession, the crowds were making a great noise, which was reverberating [all around]. Meanwhile the World-honored One had risen from his sitting meditation in the late afternoon and gone out of the shrine to practice walking meditation in the open. At that time a man among the large crowd saw that the World- honored One had risen from his sitting meditation in the late afternoon and come out of the shrine to practice walking meditation in the open. So he approached the Buddha and, after paying homage to [the Buddha’s] feet, followed him in walking meditation. Seeing this man behind him, the Buddha asked him: “Why is the crowd making a great noise, which is reverberating [all around]?” The man replied: World-honored One, today there was a great thunderstorm with hail, which killed four cows and two farmers. [Now,] during the funeral procession, the crowd is making a great noise, which is reverberating [all around]. World-honored One, did you not hear the sound of it then?

The World-honored One replied: “I heard no sound.” [The man] asked again: “World-honored One, were you asleep then?” [The World-honored One] answered: “No.” [The man] again asked: “World-honored One, at that time you were awake [yet] you did not hear that great sound?”

[The World-honored One] replied: “That is so.” Then the man thought: Most wonderful! Most remarkable! Extremely calm is the abiding of the Tathāgata, who is free from attachment and fully awakened. Why? [Because he] did not hear such a loud noise [even though] he was awake. That the World-honored One did not hear such a loud noise [even though] he was awake, this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that once the World-honored Once was staying at Uruvela on the bank of the Nerañjarā River under an Indian fig tree by the river, having just attained the path of buddhahood. At that time heavy rain fell and lasted for seven days, flooding the highlands and lowlands, and everything was under water. In the midst of that flood the World-honored One practiced walking meditation in the open, and this caused dust to rise. That the World-honored One practiced walking meditation in the open in the midst of that flood and this caused dust to rise—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that King Māra followed the Buddha for six years, seeking to find fault with him. Being unable to find any, he became weary and turned back. World-honored One, that King Māra followed the World-honored One for six years seeking to find fault with him and, being unable to find any, became weary and turned back—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. I have heard that the World-honored One remained mindful of his body unceasingly for seven years. That the World-honored One remained mindful of his body unceasingly for seven years—this I remember as an extraordinary quality of the World-honored One. Then, the World-honored One said: Ānanda, remember furthermore this extraordinary quality of the Tathāgata. Ānanda, the Tathāgata is aware of feelings as they arise, remain, and pass away, being aware of them continuously, without a moment of being

unaware of them. Ānanda, the Tathāgata is aware of thoughts... of perceptions as they arise, remain, and pass away, being aware of them continuously, without a moment of being unaware of them. Therefore, Ānanda, remember furthermore this extraordinary quality of the Tathā- gata. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the venerable Ānanda and the [other] monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma32-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN8.14]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.127]], [[AN8.70]], [[MA36]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA32]]
> ◄  [[ma31-bdk]] 📜  [[ma33-bdk]] ►
