---
sutta_code: "MA39"
sutta_title:
  - "郁伽長者 "
  - "Ugga Householder 2nd"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA39]]
> ◄  [[ma38-bdk]] 📜  [[ma40-bdk]] ►

### 39. The [Second] Discourse to the Householder Ugga

Thus have I heard: At one time, not long after the Buddha had attained final nirvana, many highly regarded senior monks were staying at Vesālī, in the Gabled Hall near Monkey Lake. At that time, the householder Ugga was per forming a lavish almsgiving for those who had come from afar, for those on a journey, for the ill, and for those who were looking after the ill. He was [also] regularly preparing porridge and meals for the monastery keepers, regularly inviting groups of twenty from the [monastic] community for food, and offering food to the assembly of monks every five days. Alms giving on such a lavish scale is like a ship, which, while returning with a full load of cargo worth hundreds and thousands, suddenly sinks and is lost. An assembly of many highly regarded senior monks heard that the house holder Ugga was performing such a lavish almsgiving for those who had come from afar, for those on a journey, for the ill, and for those who were looking after the ill; [while also] regularly preparing porridge and meals for the monastery keepers, regularly inviting groups of twenty from the [monastic] community for food, and offering food to the assembly of monks every five days. Hearing about this, they discussed it together thus: Good friends, who could go and talk to the householder Ugga, [saying,] “Householder, please stop! Do not perform such almsgiving again! Later you yourself will understand [why]”? They had this thought: Venerable Ānanda was the Buddha’s attendant. He received the World honored One’s teachings and was praised by the Buddha and by his wise companions in the holy life. Venerable Ānanda should go and talk with the householder Ugga, [saying,] “Householder, please stop! Do not perform such almsgiving again! Later you yourself will under stand [why].” Good friends, let us together go to Venerable Ānanda and tell him about this matter. Then the assembly of many highly regarded senior monks went to Ven erable Ānanda. After exchanging greetings, they sat down to one side and said:

Venerable Ānanda, did you know that the householder Ugga is per- forming a lavish almsgiving for those who have come from afar, for those on a journey, for the ill, and for those who are looking after the ill, [while also] regularly preparing porridge and meals for the monastery keepers, regularly inviting groups of twenty from the [monastic] com- munity for food, and offering food to the assembly of monks every five days? Almsgiving on such lavish scale is like a ship, which, while returning with a full load of cargo worth hundreds and thousands, sud- denly sinks and is lost. We have discussed this together thus: Who could go and talk with the householder Ugga, [saying,] “Householder, please stop! Do not perform such almsgiving again! Later you yourself will understand [why]”? Then we thought: Venerable Ānanda was the Buddha’s attendant. He received the World-honored One’s teachings and was praised by the Buddha and by his wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Ānanda should go and talk to the householder Ugga, [saying,] “House- holder, stop! Do not perform such almsgiving! Later you yourself will understand [why].” Venerable Ānanda, may you go and talk to the householder Ugga, [say- ing,] “Householder, please stop! Do not perform such almsgiving again! Later you yourself will understand [why].” Then Venerable Ānanda said to those highly regarded senior monks: Good friends, the householder Ugga has a stern personality. If I just speak for myself, I might make him very unhappy. Good friends, on whose behalf should I speak with him? Those highly regarded senior monks replied, “Venerable friend, speak on behalf of the assembly of monks! Spoken to on behalf of the assembly of monks, he will have nothing to say.” Then Venerable Ānanda silently accepted the assignment from those highly regarded senior monks. Understanding that Venerable Ānanda had

consented in silence, the highly regarded senior monks rose from their seats, circumambulated Venerable Ānanda, and returned, each to his place. Then at dawn, when the night was over, Venerable Ānanda put on his robes, took his almsbowl, and went to the house of the householder Ugga. Seeing from afar that Venerable Ānanda was coming, the householder Ugga rose from his seat and arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder. Placing his palms together [in respect] toward Venerable Ānanda, he said “Welcome, Venerable Ānanda! Venerable Ānanda has not come here for a long time. Please take a seat on this bed.” Then Venerable Ānanda took a seat on the bed. The householder Ugga paid respect with his head at Venerable Ānanda’s feet and sat down to one side. Venerable Ānanda said: Householder, it is known that you are performing a lavish almsgiving for people who have come from afar, for those on a journey, for the ill, and for those who are looking after the ill, [while also] regularly preparing porridge and meals for the monastery keepers, regularly inviting groups of twenty from the [monastic] community for food, and offering food to the assembly of monks every five days. Almsgiving on such lavish scale is like a ship, which, while return ing with a full load of cargo worth hundreds and thousands, suddenly sinks and is lost. Householder, please stop! Do not perform such alms giving again! Later you yourself will understand [why]. The householder said, “Venerable Ānanda, on whose behalf do you speak thus?” Venerable Ānanda replied, “Householder, I speak for the assembly of monks.” The householder said: If Venerable Ānanda speaks for the assembly of the monks, I have no objection. If he spoke for himself, that might make me very unhappy. Venerable Ānanda, that I make offerings like this and perform generosity like this, even until I have given away all my wealth and property— this is to fulfill my aspiration. It is like the aspiration of a wheel-turning monarch.

Venerable Ānanda asked, “Householder, what is the aspiration of a wheel- turning monarch?” The householder answered: Venerable Ānanda, the poor from the villages think, “May I be the richest among the villagers.” This is their aspiration. The rich from the villages think, “May I be the richest among the residents of the townships.” This is their aspiration. The rich from the townships think, “May I be the richest among the residents of the town.” This is their aspiration. The rich of the town think, “May I be the mayor of the town.” This is their aspiration. The mayors in the towns think, “May I be the prime minister of the state.” This is their aspiration. The prime ministers of the states think, “May I be the local king.” This is their aspiration. The local kings think, “May I be a wheel-turning monarch.” This is their aspiration. And the wheel-turning monarch thinks: May I attain fully the summit of the holy life, for the sake of which a clansman shaves off his hair and beard, dons the yellow robe, leaves home out of faith, and goes forth to practice the path. May I in this very life, understand personally and dwell having realized personally. May I know as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” This is the aspiration [of a wheel-turning monarch]. Venerable Ānanda, that I make offerings like this and perform generosity like this, even until I have given away all my wealth and property—this is to fulfill my aspiration. It is like the aspiration of a wheel-turning monarch. Venerable Ānanda, I possess this quality. Venerable Ānanda spoke in praise: “Householder, it is most wonderful, most remarkable that you possess this quality.” [The householder Ugga continued:]

Moreover, Venerable Ānanda, I possess not only this quality. Venerable Ānanda, when I visit a monastic dwelling, as soon as I see a monk I make obeisance to him. If he is practicing walking meditation, I follow him in practicing walking meditation. If he is seated, then I sit to one side and, having sat down, I listen to the Dharma. That venerable one teaches the Dharma to me and I also teach the Dharma to that venerable one. That venerable one asks me questions and I also ask that venerable one questions. That venerable one answers me and I also answer that venerable one. Venerable Ānanda, I do not recall ever having looked down on any monk, whether he is a junior monk, one of middle rank, or an elder. Venerable Ānanda, I possess this quality. The venerable Ānanda spoke in praise: “Householder, it is most won derful, most remarkable that you possess this quality.” [The householder Ugga continued:] Moreover, Venerable Ānanda, I possess not only this quality. Venerable Ānanda, when I offer alms to the assembly of monks, a deity in the sky informs me thus: Householder, this one is an arahant, this one is on the path to ara hantship, this one is a non-returner, this one is on the path to non returning, this one is a once-returner, this one is on the path to once-returning, this one is a stream-enterer, this one is on the path to stream-entry, this one is diligent, this one is not diligent. However, Venerable Ānanda, I do not recall that, when I make offerings to the assembly of monks, I have ever discriminated among them. Ven erable Ānanda, I possess this quality. Venerable Ānanda spoke in praise: “Householder, it is most wonderful, most remarkable that you possess this quality.” [The householder Ugga continued:] Moreover, Venerable Ānanda, I possess not only this quality. Venerable Ānanda, when I make offerings to the assembly of monks, a deity in the sky informs me thus:

Householder, there is the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; the teaching of the World-honored One is well pro- claimed; the community of nobles of the Tathāgata is progressing well [in the practice]. Not out of faith in that deity’s words, nor out of delight in his words, nor because of having heard it from him, but instead by my own purified knowledge I know: there is the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; the teaching of the World-honored One is well proclaimed; the community of nobles of the Tathāgata is progressing well [in the practice]. Venerable Ānanda, I possess this quality. Venerable Ānanda spoke in praise: “Householder, it is most wonderful, most remarkable that you possess this quality.” [The householder Ugga continued:] Moreover, Venerable Ānanda, I possess not only this quality. Venerable Ānanda, I have abandoned desire, am separated from evil and unwhole- some states... (and so on up to)... I dwell having attained the fourth meditative jhāna. Venerable Ānanda, I possess this quality. Venerable Ānanda spoke in praise: “Householder, it is most wonderful, most remarkable that you possess this quality.” Then the householder Ugga said, “May Venerable Ānanda please take his meal here.” For the householder Ugga’s sake, Venerable Ānanda accepted the invitation by remaining silent. Understanding that Venerable Ānanda had accepted his invitation by remaining silent, the householder Ugga rose from his seat, and personally prepared water for washing. With his own hands he prepared assorted pure and tasty dishes to eat, savor, and digest, making sure there was enough to eat. After [Venerable Ānanda] had finished eating, put aside his bowl, and washed his hands, [Ugga] took a low seat and sat to one side to listen to the Dharma. Venerable Ānanda taught the householder the Dharma, exhorted, encour- aged, and delighted him. Having, with countless skillful means, taught him the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, [Venerable Ānanda] rose from his seat and departed.

This is what Venerable Ānanda said, Having heard Venerable Ānanda’s words, the householder Ugga was delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma39-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA39]]
> ◄  [[ma38-bdk]] 📜  [[ma40-bdk]] ►
