---
sutta_code: "MA4"
sutta_title:
  - "水喻 "
  - "Water Parable"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA4]]
> ◄  [[ma3-bdk]] 📜  [[ma5-bdk]] ►

### 4 The Discourse with the Water Parable

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One addressed the bhikkhus: “I shall teach you about seven persons in the water. Listen closely, listen closely and pay careful attention!” The bhikkhus listened to receive instruction. The Buddha said: What are the seven? Suppose there is a person who remains lying in the water [below the surface]. And suppose there is another person who surfaces but then sinks again.

And suppose there is another person who surfaces and remains standing [in the water]. And suppose there is another person who surfaces and remains standing; and, having remained standing, observes. And suppose there is another person who surfaces and remains standing, and having remained standing, observes; and, having observed, crosses over [toward the farther bank]. And suppose there is another person who surfaces and remains standing; and, having remained standing, observes; and, having observed, crosses over; and, having crossed over, reaches the farther bank. And suppose there is another person who surfaces and remains standing; and, having remained standing, observes; and, having observed, crosses over; and, having crossed over, reaches the farther bank; and, having reached the farther bank, is called a “person dwelling on the [farther] bank.” In the same way, I shall repeat to you the parable of seven persons in the water. Listen closely, listen closely and pay careful attention! The bhikkhus listened to receive instruction. The Buddha said: What are the seven? Suppose there is a person who remains lying [in the water]. And suppose there is another person who, having surfaced, sinks again. And suppose there is another who, having surfaced, remains standing. And suppose there is another who, having surfaced, remains stand ing, and having remained standing, observes. And suppose there is another who, having surfaced, remains standing; and, having remained standing, observes; and, having observed, crosses over. And suppose there is another who, having surfaced, remains stand ing; having remained standing, observes; having observed, crosses over; and having crossed over, reaches the farther bank. And suppose there is another person who, having surfaced, remains standing, having remained standing, observes; having observed, crosses

over; having crossed over, reaches the farther bank; and having reached the farther bank, is called a “brahmin dwelling on the [farther] bank.” I have taught in brief this parable of seven people in the water. As it has been set out and described above, do you know what its meaning is, how to explain it, and what its moral is? The bhikkhus said to the World-honored One: The World-honored One is the source of the Dharma, the World-honored One is the master of the Dharma, the Dharma comes from the World- honored One. May he explain it! Having heard, we will come to know its meaning fully. The Buddha said: “[Then] Listen closely, listen closely and pay careful attention! I shall explain its meaning to you.” Then the bhikkhus listened to receive instruction. The Buddha said: What is [the meaning of] the person that remains lying [in the water]? Here, a person is obstructed by unwholesome states, defiled by defile- ments, experiencing the consequences of evil states, which create the root cause for birth and death. This is what is meant by the person that remains lying [in the water]. Like a person who, having sunk and drowned, remains lying in the water, just so, I say, is this [defiled] person. This is what is meant by the first person in the water parable. Such [people] are really to be found in the world. What is the person who, having surfaced, sinks again? Here, a person has “surfaced” by gaining faith in the true Dharma, keeping the precepts, practicing generosity, learning much, and [developing] wis- dom, [thereby] practicing the true Dharma. At a later time, [however,] he loses faith, which [then] becomes unstable, gives up keeping the precepts, practicing generosity, learning much, and [developing] wisdom—[these practices] thus become unstable. This is what is meant by the person who, having surfaced, sinks again. Like the person who, having [nearly] drowned in the water,

surfaces but then sinks again—just so, I say, is this [backsliding] person. This is what is meant by the second person in the water parable. Such people are really to be found in the world. What is the person who, having surfaced, remains standing? Here, a person has “surfaced” by gaining faith in the true Dharma, keeping the precepts, practicing generosity, learning much, and [developing] wisdom, [thereby] practicing the true Dharma. At a later time his faith [remains] firm and is not lost, and his keep ing of the precepts, practice of generosity, learning much, and [devel oping of] wisdom [remain] stable and firm and are not lost. This is what is meant by the person who, having surfaced, remains standing. Like the person who, having [nearly] drowned in the water, surfaces and remains standing—just so, I say, is this [stable] person. This is what is meant by the third person in the water parable. Such people are really to be found in the world. What is the person who, having surfaced, remains standing; and, having remained standing, observes? Here, a person has “surfaced” by gaining faith in the true Dharma, keeping the precepts, and practicing generosity, learning much, and [developing] wisdom, [thereby] prac ticing the true Dharma. At a later time, his faith remains firm and is not lost, and his keep ing of the precepts, practice of generosity, learning much, and [devel oping] wisdom [remain] stable and firm and are not lost. Being estab lished in the true Dharma, he knows suffering as it really is, knows the arising of suffering, knows the cessation of suffering, and knows the path to the cessation of suffering as it really is. Through such knowing and seeing, three fetters are eliminated: namely, personality view, clinging to precepts, and doubt; and through the cessation of these three fetters, he attains stream-entry.^51 He is assured of progress toward full awakening within at most seven existences, without falling into evil states. Having passed through [at most] seven existences in heavenly or human realms, he will attain the ending of suffering. This is what is meant by the person who having surfaced, remains standing, and having remained standing, observes. Like the person who, having [nearly] drowned in the water and having surfaced remains

standing, and having remained standing observes—just so, I say, is this person [who attains stream-entry]. This is what is meant by the fourth person in the water parable. Such people are really to be found in the world. What is the person who, having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; and having observed, crosses over? Here, a person has “surfaced” by gaining faith in the true Dharma, keeping the precepts, practicing generosity, learning much, and [developing] wisdom, [thereby] practicing the true Dharma. At a later time, his faith [remains] firm and is not lost, his keeping of the precepts, practice of generosity, learning much, and [developing] wisdom [remain] stable and firm and are not lost. Being established in the true Dharma, he knows suffering as it really is, knows the arising of suffering, knows the cessation of suffering, knows the path to the cessation of suffering, as it really is. Through such knowing and seeing, three fetters are eliminated: namely, personality view, clinging to pre- cepts, and doubt; and, having eliminated these three fetters, he [also] reduces sensual desire, anger, and ignorance, and attains once-returning. Having passed through one existence in a heavenly or human realm, he will attain the ending of suffering. This is what is meant by the person who, having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; and having observed, crosses over. Like the person who, having [nearly] drowned in the water and having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; and having observed, crosses over—just so, I say, is this person [who attains once-returning]. This is what is meant by the fifth person in the water parable. Such people are really to be found in the world. What is the person who, having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; having observed, crosses over; and having crossed over, reaches the farther bank? Here, a person has “surfaced” by gaining faith in the true Dharma, keeping the precepts, practicing generosity, learning much, and [developing] wisdom, [thereby] prac- ticing the true Dharma. At a later time his faith [remains] firm and is not lost, his keeping of the precepts, practice of generosity, learning much, and [developing]

wisdom [remain] stable and firm and are not lost. Being established in the true Dharma, he knows suffering as it really is, knows the arising of suffering, knows the cessation of suffering, knows the path to the cessation of suffering as it really is. Through such knowing and seeing, the five lower fetters are eliminated—namely, lustful desire, ill will, personality view, clinging to precepts, and doubt. With these five lower fetters eliminated, he will be born in another[, heavenly] realm and there attain final nirvana,^52 having attained the condition of non-return ing, not coming back to this world. This is what is meant by the person who, having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; having observed, crosses over; and having crossed over, reaches the farther bank. Like the person who, having [nearly] drowned in the water and having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; having observed, crosses over; and having crossed over, reaches the farther bank—just so, I say, is this person [who attains non-returning]. This is what is meant by the sixth person in the water parable. Such people are really to be found in the world. What is the person who, having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; having observed, crosses over; having crossed over, reaches the farther bank; and having reached the farther bank, is called a “brahmin dwelling on the [farther] bank”? Here, a person has “surfaced” by gaining faith in the true Dharma, keeping the precepts, practicing generosity, learning much, and [developing] wisdom, [thereby] practicing the true Dharma. At a later time, his faith [remains] firm and is not lost, his keeping of the precepts, practice of generosity, learning, and [developing] wis dom are stable and firm and are not lost. Being established in the true Dharma, he knows suffering as it really is, knows the arising of suf fering, knows the cessation of suffering, and knows the path [leading] to the cessation of suffering as it really is. Through such knowing and seeing, he attains liberation of the mind from the taint of desire, from the taint of becoming, and from the taint of ignorance. Being liberated, he knows he is liberated; he knows as it really is: “Birth is ended, the

holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” This is what is meant by the person who, having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; having observed, crosses over; having crossed over, reaches the farther bank; and having reached the farther bank, is called a “brahmin dwelling on the [farther] bank.” Like the person who, having [nearly] drowned in the water and having surfaced, remains standing; having remained standing, observes; having observed, crosses over; having crossed over, reaches the farther bank; and having reached the farther bank, is called a “person standing on the [farther] bank”—just so, I say, is this person [who has attained lib- eration]. This is what is meant by the seventh person in the water para- ble. Such people are really to be found in the world. When I said earlier, “I shall teach you about seven persons in the water,” it was on account of this that I said it. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the bhikkhus were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA39.3]] |  |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN]], [[ITI69]], [[SN5]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA4]]
> ◄  [[ma3-bdk]] 📜  [[ma5-bdk]] ►
