---
sutta_code: "MA60"
sutta_title:
  - "四洲 "
  - "Four Continents"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA60]]
> ◄  [[ma59-bdk]] 📜  [[ma61-bdk]] ►

### 60. The Discourse on the Four Continents

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time Venerable Ānanda, who was sitting in meditation in a quiet place, reflecting, had this thought:

Very few people in the world are able to fulfill their intentions in regard to sensual pleasures, and only few become disenchanted with sensual pleasures by the time they die. It is very rare that people in the world are able to fulfill their intentions in regard to sensual pleasures or become disenchanted with sensual pleasures by the time they die. Then, in the evening, Venerable Ānanda rose from sitting in meditation and approached the Buddha. Having arrived there, he made obeisance, sat down to one side, and said:

World-honored One. Today, [while] sitting in meditation in a quiet place, reflecting, I had this thought: Very few people in the world are able to fulfill their intentions in regard to sensual pleasures, and only few become disenchanted

with sensual pleasures by the time they die. It is very rare that people in the world are able to fulfill their intentions in regard to sensual pleasures or become disenchanted with sensual pleasures by the time they die. The Buddha told Ānanda: That is so. That is so. Very few people in the world are able to fulfill their intentions in regard to sensual pleasures, and only few become disenchanted with sensual pleasures by the time they die. It is very rare, Ānanda, that people in the world are able to fulfill their intentions in regard to sensual pleasures or become disenchanted with sensual pleasures by the time they die. It is extremely rare, Ānanda, extremely rare indeed, that people in the world are able to fulfill their intentions in regard to sensual pleas ures, or become disenchanted with sensual pleasures by the time they die. On the contrary, Ānanda, many people in the world, a great many, are not able to fulfill their intentions in regard to sensual pleasures and do not become disenchanted with sensual pleasures by the time they die. Why is that? In the past, Ānanda, there was a king called Mandhātu, a wheel turning monarch, intelligent and wise, equipped with a fourfold army to reign over the entire world, freely, as he liked. Being a righteous Dharma king, he attained seven treasures. Those seven treasures were the wheel treasure, the elephant treasure, the horse treasure, the jewel treasure, the woman treasure, the steward treasure, and the counselor treasure—these were the seven. He had a thousand sons, handsome, brave, fearless, and able to overcome others. He certainly ruled over the whole earth, as far as the ocean, without relying on blade or cudgel, just by teaching the Dharma, bringing peace and happiness. Then, Ānanda, after a very long time, King Mandhātu thought: I rule over Jambudīpa, which is very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants; I possess the seven treasures and a thousand sons. [But] I wish that it would rain treasures in the palace for seven days until they have accumulated up to my knees.

Ānanda, because King Mandhātu was endowed with great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power, as soon as he had this wishful thought, it rained treasures in the palace for seven days until they had accumulated up to his knees. Then, Ānanda, after a very long time, King Mandhātu thought: I rule over Jambudīpa, which is very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants; I possess the seven treasures and have a thousand sons; and it rained treasures in the palace for seven days until they had accumulated up to my knees. I recall having heard from the ancients that there is a continent in the west called Godānī, which is very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants. I now wish to go and see the continent of Godānī. Having gone there, I will subdue it completely.

Ānanda, because King Mandhātu was endowed with great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power, as soon as he had this wishful thought, by means of his supernormal power he traveled there through the air, along with his fourfold army. Ānanda, King Mandhātu soon reached the continent of Godānī and remained there. Ānanda, King Mandhātu subdued the continent of Godānī completely, and remained there for countless hundreds and thousands of years. Then, Ānanda, after a very long time, King Mandhātu again thought:

I rule over Jambudīpa, which is very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants; I possess the seven treasures and have a thousand sons; and it rained treasures in the palace for seven days until they had accumulated up to my knees. I also rule over the continent of Godānī. I also recall having heard from the ancients that there is a continent in the east called Pubbavideha, which is very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants. I now wish to go and see the continent of Pubbavideha. Having gone there, I will subdue it completely.

Ānanda, because King Mandhātu was endowed with great supernor mal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power, as soon as he had this wishful thought, by means of his super normal power he traveled there through the air, along with his fourfold army. Ānanda, King Mandhātu soon reached the continent of Pubba videha and remained there. Ānanda, King Mandhātu subdued the con tinent of Pubbavideha completely, and remained there for countless hundreds and thousands of years. Then, Ānanda, after a very long time, King Mandhātu again thought: I rule over Jambudīpa, which is very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants; I possess the seven treasures and have a thousand sons; and it rained treasures in the palace for seven days until they had accumulated up to my knees. I also rule over the continent of Godānī and the continent of Pubbavideha. I also recall having heard from the ancients that there is a con tinent in the north called Uttarakuru, very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants, who have no perception of self and no pos sessions. I now wish to go and see the continent of Uttarakuru, along with my retainers. Having gone there, I will subdue it completely. Ānanda, because King Mandhātu was endowed with great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power, as soon as he had this wishful thought, by means of his supernormal power he traveled there through the air, along with his fourfold army. Ānanda, King Mandhātu saw from afar that the plains were white and said to his courtiers, “Do you see that the plains of Uttarakuru are white?” The courtiers answered, “Yes, your majesty. We see it.” The king said further, Did you know that that [white color] is natural white rice, which is the staple food of the people of Uttarakuru? You too should eat this food.

Ānanda, King Mandhātu also saw from afar that on the continent of Uttarakuru there were various kinds of trees, clean, excellent, dec- orative, and of various colors, which were surrounded by a fence. He said to his courtiers: Do you see that on the continent of Uttarakuru there are various kinds of trees, clean, excellent, decorative, and of various colors, which are surrounded by a fence?

The courtiers answered, “Yes, your majesty. We see them.” The king said further: Did you know that these trees produce clothes for the people of Uttarakuru? The people of Uttarakuru take these clothes and wear them. You too should take these clothes and wear them.

Ānanda, King Mandhātu soon reached the continent of Uttarakuru and remained there. Ānanda, King Mandhātu subdued the continent of Uttarakuru completely and remained there for countless hundreds and thousands of years, along with his retainers. Then, Ānanda, after a very long time, King Mandhātu again thought: I rule over Jambudīpa, which is very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants; I possess the seven treasures and have a thousand sons; and it rained treasures in the palace for seven days until they had accumulated up to my knees. I also rule over the continent of Godānī, the continent of Pubbavideha, and the continent of Uttarakuru. I also heard from the ancients that there is a heaven called the heaven of the thirty-three. I now wish to go and see the heaven of the thirty-three.

Ānanda, because King Mandhātu was endowed with great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power, as soon as he had this wishful thought, by means of his supernormal power he traveled through the air toward the sunlight, along with his fourfold army. Ānanda, King Mandhātu saw from afar that in the heaven of the thirty-three, on Sumeru, king of mountains, there was something

resembling a great cloud. He said to his courtiers, “Do you see, in the heaven of the thirty-three, on Sumeru, king of mountains, something resembling a great cloud?” The courtiers answered, “Yes, your majesty. We see it.” The king said further: Did you know that that is the coral tree of the thirty-three gods? Under this tree the thirty-three gods, endowed with the five kinds of sensual pleasures, enjoy themselves during the four months of the summer. Ānanda, King Mandhātu also saw from afar that in the heaven of the thirty-three, on Sumeru, king of mountains, near its southern side, there was something resembling a great cloud. He said to his courtiers: Do you see, in the heaven of the thirty-three, on Sumeru, king of mountains, near its southern side, something resembling a great cloud? The courtiers answered, “Yes, your majesty. We see it.” The king said further: Did you know that that is the Sudhamma Hall of the thirty-three gods? In this Sudhamma Hall the thirty-three gods reflect on the Dharma and on its meaning for gods and human beings on the eighth day and the fourteenth [or] fifteenth day [of each lunar fortnight]. Then, Ānanda, King Mandhātu soon reached the heaven of the thirty three. Having reached the heaven of the thirty-three, he entered the Sudhamma Hall. There Sakka, ruler of the gods, gave King Mandhātu half of his throne to sit on. King Mandhātu then sat on half of the throne of Sakka, ruler of the gods. Then [as they sat there], King Mandhātu and Sakka, ruler of the gods, were indistinguishable. There was no difference between them in radiance, complexion, or form; there was also no difference in move ments, mannerisms, or clothing. The only difference was in regard to the blinking of eyes.

Then, Ānanda, after a very long time King Mandhātu again thought:

I rule over Jambudīpa, which is very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhabitants; I possess the seven treasures and have a thousand sons; and it rained treasures in the palace for seven days until they had accumulated up to my knees. I also rule over the continent of Godānī, the continent of Pubbavideha, and the continent of Uttarakuru. Also, I have visited the meeting of the great assembly of the thirty-three gods. I have entered the celestial Sudhamma Hall, where Sakka, ruler of the gods, gave me half of his throne to sit on. I was able to sit on half of the throne of Sakka, ruler of the gods. [As we sat there,] I and Sakka, ruler of the gods, were indis tinguishable. There was no difference between us in radiance, complexion, or form; there was also no difference in movements, mannerisms, or clothing. The only difference was in regard to the blinking of eyes. I now want to oust Sakka, ruler of the gods, take over the other half of the throne, and become king of gods and human beings, [reigning] freely, as I like.

Ānanda, as soon as King Mandhātu had this wishful thought, before he knew it, he had fallen back to Jambudīpa, lost his supernormal pow- ers, and become seriously ill. As King Mandhātu was dying, his courtiers went to him and said:

Your majesty, if brahmins, householders, and [your] subjects come and ask us what King Mandhātu said as he was dying, how, your majesty, should we answer these brahmins, householders, and sub jects?

Then King Mandhātu told the courtiers:

If brahmins, householders, and [my] subjects come and ask you what King Mandhātu said as he was dying, you should answer like this: “[Even though] King Mandhātu obtained the continent of Jambudīpa, his intentions were not fulfilled by the time he died.

[Even though] King Mandhātu obtained the seven treasures, his intentions were not fulfilled by this by the time he died. [Even though] he had a thousand sons, his intentions were not fulfilled by this by the time he died. [Even though] for King Mandhātu treasures rained down for seven days, his intentions were not ful filled by this by the time he died. [Even though] King Mandhātu obtained the continent of Godānī, his intentions were not fulfilled by this by the time he died. [Even though] King Mandhātu obtained the continent of Pubba videha, his intentions were not fulfilled by this by the time he died. [Even though] King Mandhātu obtained the continent of Uttarakuru, his intentions were not fulfilled by this by the time he died. [Even though] King Mandhātu visited the assembly of the gods, his intentions were not fulfilled by this by the time he died. [Even though] King Mandhātu was endowed with the five kinds of sensual pleasures, forms, sounds, smells, flavors, and tactile sen sations, his intentions were not fulfilled by this by the time he died. If brahmins, householders, and [my] subjects come and ask you what King Mandhātu said as he was dying, you should answer like this. Then the World-honored One uttered these verses: [Even if it] rains wonderful treasures, One who has desire will not be satisfied. Desire is suffering, devoid of pleasure— This the wise should know. Even if [one who has desire] obtains a mass of gold, As great as the Himalaya, He will not be satisfied at all— Thus the wise reflect. [Even on] gaining the five sublime heavenly sensual pleasures He does not delight in these five, A [true] disciple of the Fully Awakened One, [Instead] wishes for the destruction of craving and for non-attachment.^157

Then the World-honored One said: Ānanda, do you think that King Mandhātu of ancient times was someone other [than me]? Do not think so. You should know that he was me. At that time, Ānanda, I wanted to benefit myself, to benefit others, to benefit many people; I had compassion for the whole world, and I sought prosperity, benefit, peace, and happiness for gods and human beings. The teaching I gave at that time did not lead to the ultimate, was not the ultimate purity, not the ultimate holy life, not the ultimate com- pletion of the holy life. At that time I was not able to abandon birth, old age, disease, death, sorrow, and distress, and I was not able to attain liberation from all suffering. Ānanda, I have now appeared in this world as a Tathāgata, free of attachment, fully awakened, perfect in knowledge and conduct, a Well- gone One, a knower of the world, unsurpassable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and human beings, a buddha, a Fortunate One. I now benefit myself, benefit others, benefit many people; I have compassion for the whole world, and I seek prosperity, benefit, peace, and happiness for gods and human beings. The teaching I now give leads to the ultimate, is the ultimate purity, the ultimate completion of the holy life. I have now abandoned birth, old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and distress. I have now attained com- plete liberation from suffering. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Ven- erable Ānanda and the [other] bhikkhus were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma60-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DA6]], [[DHP\|DHP187.]], [[MA67]], [[MA70]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA60]]
> ◄  [[ma59-bdk]] 📜  [[ma61-bdk]] ►
