---
sutta_code: "MA77"
sutta_title:
  - "娑雞帝三族姓子 "
  - "Three Clansmen at Sāketa"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA77]]
> ◄  [[ma76-bdk]] 📜  [[ma78-bdk]] ►

### 77. The Discourse on Three Clansmen at Sāketa

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāketa, in Añjana Forest. At that time in Sāketa there were three clansmen, Venerable Anuruddha, Venerable Nandiya, and Venerable Kimbila, who had just gone forth together at a young age to train, having recently come to enter this true Dharma together. Then the World-honored One asked the bhikkhus: These three clansmen, who have just gone forth together at a young age to train, having recently come to enter this true Dharma together, do these three clansmen delight in practicing the holy life in this true Dharma and discipline?

Then all of the bhikkhus kept silent and did not reply. A second and a third time the World-honored One asked the bhikkhus: These three clansmen, who have just gone forth together at a young age to train, having recently come to enter this true Dharma together, do these three clansmen delight in practicing the holy life in this true Dharma and discipline? A second and a third time all of the bhikkhus again kept silent and did not reply. Then the World-honored One himself asked the three clansmen, saying to Venerable Anuruddha:

You three clansmen have just gone forth together at a young age to train, having recently come to enter this true Dharma together. Anuruddha, do you all delight in practicing the holy life in this true Dharma and discipline? Venerable Anuruddha replied, “That is so, World-honored One. We do delight in practicing the holy life in this true Dharma and discipline.” The World-honored One said: Anuruddha, you are in your youth, you are young lads, with completely black hair and healthy bodies. You [could have] delighted in recreation, delighting in bathing frequently and adorning the body, being surrounded by relatives and parents who cherish you, who with weeping and tears did not wish you to go forth to train in the path. [Yet] you were able to shave off your hair and beards, don yellow robes, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path. Anuruddha, you are not training in the path out of fear of kings, or fear of robbers, or fear of debts, or other fears, nor are you training in the path because you fear poverty and the inability to make a living. Is it not rather because you are weary of birth, old age, disease, death, sorrow and distress and wish to transcend this great mass of _dukkha_? Anuruddha, is it not out of such a state of mind that you have gone forth to train in the path? [Venerable Anuruddha] answered, “That is so.” [The Buddha said,] “Anuruddha, if a clansman goes forth to train in the path because of such a state of mind, does he know the way to attain countless wholesome states?”

Venerable Anuruddha said to the World-honored One: The World-honored One is the source of the Dharma, the World-honored One is the master of the Dharma, the Dharma comes from the World-hon ored One. May he explain this and, having heard it, we will come to know the meaning fully. The Buddha said, “Anuruddha, listen closely and pay proper attention. I shall analyze the meaning of this for you.” Anuruddha and his companions listened to receive the teaching. The World-honored One said: Anuruddha, if one is overwhelmed by desires and is in the grip of evil states, then one does not attain the happiness of renunciation, the supreme peace of tranquility.Then one’s mind gives rise to covetousness, ill-will, and sloth-and-torpor, the mind gives rise to discontent, the body becomes lethargic, and one overeats and becomes depressed. Such a monk is unable to bear hunger and thirst, cold and heat, mos quitoes, gadflies, flies and fleas, and irritation by the wind or the sun. He is also unable to bear [receiving] evil speech or being beaten with sticks. [If] the body encounters all sorts of diseases, so painful that one wishes to end one’s life, or whatever [else] is undesirable—all of that he is unable to endure. Why is that? Because he is overwhelmed by sensual desire and is in the grip of evil states he does not attain the happiness of renunciation, the supreme peace of tranquility. If he is secluded from sensual desire and not in the grip of evil states, he will certainly attain the happiness of renunciation, the supreme peace of tranquility. Then the mind will not give rise to covetousness, ill-will, and sloth-and-torpor. The mind will not give rise to discontent, the body will not become lethargic, and he will not overeat and become depressed. Such a monk is able to bear hunger and thirst, cold and heat, mosquitoes, gadflies, flies and fleas, and irritation by the wind or the sun. He is also able to bear [receiving] evil speech or being beaten with sticks. When the body encounters all sorts of diseases, so painful that one wishes to end one’s life, or whatever [else] is undesirable—all of that he is able to endure.

Why is that? Because he is not overwhelmed by desires and not in the grip of evil states, he attains the happiness of renunciation, the supreme peace of tranquility. The World-honored One asked, “Anuruddha, why does the Tathāgata get rid of some, make use of some, endure some, stop some, and reject some?”^62 Anuruddha said to the World-honored One: The World-honored One is the source of the Dharma, the World-honored One is the master of the Dharma, the Dharma comes from the World-hon- ored One. May he explain this; having heard it, we will come to know the meaning fully.” The Buddha said, “Anuruddha, listen closely and pay proper attention. I shall analyze the meaning of this for you.” Anuruddha and his companions listened to receive the teaching. The World-honored One said: Anuruddha, it is not because the Tathāgata has not eradicated the taints and defilements that are the roots of future becoming, that result in affliction and suffering, that are the cause of birth, old age, disease, and death; and it is not because he does not have knowledge [of having attained liberation] that he gets rid of some, makes use of some, endures some, stops some, and rejects some. Anuruddha, it is just because of this body, the six sense spheres, and the life faculty that the Tathāgata gets rid of some, makes use of some, endures some, stops some and rejects some. Anuruddha, this is the reason why the Tathāgata gets rid of some, makes use of some, endures some, stops some, and rejects some.^63 The World-honored One asked: Anuruddha, why does the Tathāgata stay in quiet places, beneath trees in mountain forests, delighting in dwelling on high crags, in peaceful places without noise, remote places free of evil, free of people, places conducive to sitting in meditation?^64 Venerable Anuruddha said to the World-honored One:

The World-honored One is the source of the Dharma, the World-honored One is the master of the Dharma, the Dharma comes from the World-hon ored One. May he explain this; having heard it, we will come to know the meaning fully.” The Buddha said, “Anuruddha, listen closely and pay proper attention. I shall analyze the meaning of this for you.” Anuruddha and his companions listened to receive the teaching. The World-honored One said: Anuruddha, it is not because the Tathāgata wishes to attain what he has not yet attained, wishes to gain what he has not yet gained, wishes to realize what he has not yet realized that he stays in quiet places, beneath trees in mountain forests, delighting in dwelling on high crags, in peaceful places without noise, remote places free of evil and free of people, places conducive to sitting in meditation. Anuruddha, for two reasons the Tathāgata stays in quiet places, beneath trees in mountain forests, delighting in dwelling on high crags, in peaceful places without noise, remote places free of evil and free of people, places conducive to sitting in meditation. The first is for the sake of a happy abiding for himself here and now. The second is because he has compassion for later generations, thinking “Perhaps later generations will follow the exam ple of the Tathāgata and stay in quiet places, beneath trees in mountain forests, delighting in dwelling on high crags, in peaceful places without noise, remote places free of evil and free of people, places conducive to sitting in meditation.” Anuruddha, for these reasons the Tathāgata stays in quiet places, beneath trees in mountain forests, delighting in dwelling on high crags, in peaceful places without noise, remote places free of evil and free of people, places conducive to sitting meditation. The World-honored One asked: Anuruddha, why does the Tathāgata declare of disciples who have died that “So-and-so has been reborn in a such-and-such a place” and “So and-so has been reborn in such-and-such a place”?

Venerable Anuruddha said to the World-honored One: The World-honored One is the source of the Dharma, the World-honored One is the master of the Dharma, the Dharma comes from the World-hon- ored One. May he explain this; having heard it, we will come to know the meaning fully. The Buddha said, “Anuruddha, listen closely and pay proper attention. I shall analyze the meaning of this for you.” Anuruddha and his companions listened to receive the teaching. The World-honored One said: Anuruddha, the Tathāgata does not say this in order to get people interested. It is not in order to deceive people, or out of a wish to make people happy, that he declares of disciples who have died that “So-and-so has been reborn in a such-and-such a place” and “So-and-so has been reborn in such-and-such a place.” Anuruddha, the Tathāgata does this just so pure and faithful clansmen and clanswomen, who have great faith and great devotion, may develop great delight, and so that on hearing this true Dharma and discipline they might wish to follow these examples, just like that. It is for this reason that [the Tathāgata] declares of disciples who have died that “So-and-so has been reborn in a such-and-such a place” and “So-and-so has been reborn in such-and-such a place.” A monk may hear that Venerable So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had attained final knowledge, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Either he may have himself seen that venerable one, or he may have frequently heard from others, “That venerable one had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learn- ing thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that venerable one, his adherence to the precepts, his broad learning, his kind generosity, and his wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that monk may aspire to

follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the monk will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a monk may hear that Venerable So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eliminated the five lower fetters, that he will take birth in between [in the Pure Abodes] and [attain] nirvana there, and, having attained the condition of nonreturning, he will not come back to this world. Either he may have himself seen that venerable one or he may have fre quently heard from others, “That venerable one had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that venerable one, his adherence to the precepts, his broad learning, his kind generosity, and his wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that monk may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the monk will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a monk may hear that Venerable So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eradicated the three fetters and attenuated sensual passion, anger, and delusion; that he had attained once-returning among deva s or human beings; and, after returning [just] once, he will attain the end of dukkha. Either he may have himself seen that venerable one, or he may have frequently heard from others, “That venerable one had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind gen erosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that venerable one, his adherence to the precepts, his broad learning, his kind generosity, and his wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that monk may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the monk will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a monk may hear that Venerable So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eradicated the three fetters and attained stream-entry; that, without

falling into evil states, he will certainly proceed toward full awakening; and, after experiencing at most seven [more] existences, being reborn seven times among _deva_ s and human beings, he will attain the end of _dukkha._ Either he may have himself seen that venerable one, or he may have frequently heard from others, “That venerable one had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind gen- erosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that venerable one, his adherence to the precepts, his broad learning, his kind generosity, and his wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that monk may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the monk will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Anuruddha, a nun may hear that the nun So-and-so has died at such- and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had attained final knowledge, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Either she may have herself seen that nun or she may have frequently heard from others, “That nun had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that nun, her adherence to the precepts, her broad learning, her kind generosity, and her wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that nun may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the nun will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a nun may hear that the nun So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eliminated the five lower fetters; that she will take birth in between [in the Pure Abodes] and [attain] nirvana there; and, having attained the condition of nonreturning, she will not come back to this world. Either she may have herself seen that nun, or she may have frequently heard from others, “That nun had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that nun, her adher- ence to the precepts, her broad learning, her kind generosity, and her wisdom.

Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that nun may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the nun will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a nun may hear that the nun So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eradicated the three fetters and attenuated sensual passion, anger, and delusion; that she had attained once-returning among deva s or human beings; and, after returning [just] once, she will attain the end of dukkha. Either she may have herself seen that nun, or she may have frequently heard from others, “That nun had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that nun, her adher ence to the precepts, her broad learning, her kind generosity, and her wis dom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that nun may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the nun will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a nun may hear that the nun So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eradicated the three fetters and attained stream-entry; that, without falling into evil states, she will certainly proceed toward full awakening; and, after experiencing at most seven [more] existences, being reborn seven times among deva s and human beings, she will attain the end of dukkha. Either she may have herself seen that nun, or she may have frequently heard from others, “That nun had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that nun, her adher ence to the precepts, her broad learning, her kind generosity, and her wis dom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that nun may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the nun will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Anuruddha, a male lay disciple may hear that the male lay disciple So and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eliminated the five lower fetters; that he will take birth in between [in the Pure Abodes] and [attain] nirvana there; and, having attained the condition of nonreturning, he will not come back to

this world. Either he may have himself seen that male lay disciple, or he may have frequently heard from others, “That male lay disciple had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that male lay dis- ciple, his adherence to the precepts, his broad learning, his kind generosity, and his wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that male lay disciple may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the male lay disciple will certainly attain some level of dis- tinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a male lay disciple may hear that the male lay dis- ciple So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eradicated the three fetters and attenuated sensual passion, anger, and delusion; that he had attained once-returning among _deva_ s or human beings; and, after returning [just] once, he will attain the end of _dukkha._ Either he may have himself seen that male lay disciple, or he may have frequently heard from others, “That male lay disciple had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that male lay dis- ciple, his adherence to the precepts, his broad learning, his kind generosity, and his wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that male lay disciple may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the male lay disciple will certainly attain some level of dis- tinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a male lay disciple may hear that the male lay dis- ciple So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eradicated the three fetters and attained stream-entry; that, without falling into evil states, he will certainly proceed toward full awakening; and, after experiencing at most seven [more] exis- tences, being reborn seven times among _deva_ s and human beings, he will attain the end of _dukkha._ Either he may have himself seen that male lay disciple, or he may have frequently heard from others, “That male lay disciple had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.”

Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that male lay dis ciple, his adherence to the precepts, his broad learning, his kind generosity, and his wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that male lay disciple may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the male lay disciple will certainly attain some level of dis tinction and peacefully abide in it. Anuruddha, a female lay disciple may hear that the female lay disciple So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eliminated the five lower fetters; that she will take birth in between [in the Pure Abodes] and [attain] nirvana there; and, having attained the condition of nonreturning, she will not come back to this world. Either she may have herself seen that female lay disciple, or she may have frequently heard from others, “That female lay disciple had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that female lay disciple, her adherence to the precepts, her broad learning, her kind gen erosity, and her wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that female lay disciple may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the female lay disciple will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a female lay disciple may hear that the female lay disciple So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eradicated the three fetters and attenuated sensual passion, anger, and delusion; that she had attained once-returning among deva s or human beings; and, after returning [just] once, she will attain the end of dukkha. Either she may have herself seen that female lay disciple, or she may have frequently heard from others, “That female lay disciple had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that female lay disciple, her adherence to the precepts, her broad learning, her kind gen erosity, and her wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that female lay disciple may aspire to follow this example, just like that.

Anuruddha, in this way the female lay disciple will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Again, Anuruddha, a female lay disciple may hear that the female lay disciple So-and-so has died at such-and-such a place and that the Buddha declared that [the deceased] had eradicated the three fetters and attained stream-entry; that, without falling into evil states, she will certainly proceed toward full awakening; and, after experiencing at most seven [more] exis- tences, being reborn seven times among _deva_ s and human beings, she will attain the end of _dukkha._ Either she may have herself seen that female lay disciple, or she may have frequently heard from others, “That female lay disciple had faith thus, adhered to the precepts thus, had broad learning thus, practiced kind generosity thus, had wisdom thus.” Having heard that, this person recollects the faith of that female lay disciple, her adherence to the precepts, her broad learning, her kind gen- erosity, and her wisdom. Having heard this true Dharma and discipline, that female lay disciple may aspire to follow this example, just like that. Anuruddha, in this way the female lay disciple will certainly attain some level of distinction and peacefully abide in it. Anuruddha, for this reason the Tathāgata declares of disciples who have died that some are reborn in such-and-such a place, and some [others] are reborn in such-and-such a place. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Anuruddha and the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma77-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA10]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA77]]
> ◄  [[ma76-bdk]] 📜  [[ma78-bdk]] ►
