---
sutta_code: "MA85"
sutta_title:
  - "真人 "
  - "True Person"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA85]]
> ◄  [[ma84-bdk]] 📜  [[ma86-bdk]] ►

### 85. The Discourse on the True Person

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One said to the bhikkhus, “I will now teach you the nature of a true person and the nature of an untrue person. Listen closely, listen closely and pay careful attention!” Then the bhikkhus listened to receive instruction. The Buddha said: What is the nature of an untrue person? Suppose that a certain person who has gone forth to practice the path is from a high family, whereas others are not like that. Because he is from a high family, he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^130 One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “It is not because I am from a high family that I eradicate sensual passion, anger, and delusion. Suppose that a person who has gone forth to practice the path is not from a high family [but] he practices the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, follows the Dharma, keeps the direction of the Dharma, and progresses in step with the Dharma. Because of this, he [should] receive support and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person is handsome and agreeable, whereas others are not like that. Because of being handsome and agreeable, he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^131 One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “It is not because I am handsome and agreeable that I eradicate sensual passion, anger, and delusion. Suppose that a person is not handsome and agreeable [but] he practices the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, follows the Dharma, keeps the direction of the Dharma, and progresses in step with the Dharma. Because of this he [should] receive support and respect.”

If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person is eloquent and competent in talk- ing, whereas others are not like that. Because he is eloquent and competent in talking, he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^132 One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “It is not because I am eloquent and competent in talking that I eradicate sensual passion, anger, and delusion. Suppose that a person is not eloquent and competent in talking, [but] he practices the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, follows the Dharma, keeps the direction of the Dharma, and progresses in step with the Dharma. Because of this he [should] receive support and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person is an elder, known to the king, recognized by the people, and of great merit, whereas others are not like that. Because he is an elder, known to the king, recognized by the people, and of great merit, he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^133 One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “It is not because I am an elder, known to the king, recognized by the people, and of great merit, that I eradicate sensual passion, anger, and delusion. Suppose that a person is not an elder, not known to the king, not recognized by the people, and not of great merit [but] he practices the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, follows the Dharma, keeps the direction of the Dharma, and progresses in step with the Dharma. Because of this, he [should] receive support and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person recites the discourses, has mem- orized the discipline, and is learned in the Abhidharma, is versed in the Āgamas, and is very learned in the collections of discourses, whereas others are not like that. Because he is versed in the Āgamas and very

learned in the collections of discourses, he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^134 One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “It is not because I am versed in the Āgamas and very learned in the collections of discourses that I eradicate sensual passion, anger, and delusion. Suppose that someone is not versed in the Āgamas, not very learned in the collec tions of discourses [but] he practices the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, follows the Dharma, keeps the direction of the Dharma, and pro gresses in step with the Dharma. Because of this, he [should] receive sup port and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person wears rag robes,... limits [himself to] three robes,... possesses unpretentious robes, whereas others are not like that. Because he possesses unpretentious robes he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^135 One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “It is not because I possess unpretentious robes that I eradicate sensual passion, anger, and delusion. Suppose that a person does not possess unpretentious robes [but] he practices the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, follows the Dharma, keeps the direction of the Dharma, and progresses in step with the Dharma. Because of this, he [should] receive support and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person always observes the practice of begging for almsfood, consistently accepts just five measures of rice, and begs food at no more than seven houses,... eats only once [per day],... abstains from thick drinks after noon, whereas others are not like that. Because he abstains from thick drinks after noon, he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^136 One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “It is not because I abstain from thick drinks after noon that I eradicate sensual pas sion, anger, and delusion. Suppose that a person does not abstain from thick drinks after noon [but] he practices the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, follows the Dharma, keeps the direction of the Dharma, and

progresses in step with the Dharma. Because of this, he [should] receive support and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person dwells in secluded places, beneath a tree in a mountain forest, or on a high crag, or out in the open, or in a cemetery, and that he is capable of knowing the [proper] time [for staying in such places], whereas others are not like that. Because he is capable of knowing the [proper] time [for staying in such places], he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^137 One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “It is not because I am capable of knowing the [proper] time [for staying in such places] that I eradicate sensual passion, anger, and delusion. Suppose that a person is incapable of knowing the [proper] time [for staying in such places but] he practices the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, follows the Dharma, keeps the direction of the Dharma, and progresses in step with the Dharma. Because of this, he [should] receive support and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person attains the first jhāna, whereas others are not like that. Because he has attained the first jhāna, he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person. One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “The World- honored One has said that the first jhāna is of an immeasurable type; [however,] if one were to measure it, that would be clinging.^138 Because of this [absence of clinging], he [should] receive support and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. Again, suppose that a certain person attains the second,... the third,... the fourth, jhāna;... attains the sphere of [boundless] space,... the sphere of [boundless] consciousness,... the sphere of nothingness,... the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, whereas others are not like that. Because he has attained the sphere of neither-perception-nor- nonperception, he praises himself and looks down on others. This is the nature of an untrue person.^139

One who has the nature of a true person reflects like this: “The World honored One has said that the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception is of an immeasurable type; [however,] if one were to measure it, then that would be clinging. Because of this [absence of clinging], he [should] receive support and respect.” If, advancing in this way, he attains the true Dharma, without praising himself or looking down on others, then this is the nature of a true person. bhikkhus, this is what is meant by the nature of a true person and the nature of an untrue person. You should know the nature of a true person and the nature of an untrue person. Having known the nature of a true person and the nature of an untrue person, abandon the nature of an untrue person and train in the nature of a true person. You should train like this. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the bhikkhus were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma85-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA17.9]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN2.23]], [[SN3.22]], [[SN3.4]], [[SN3.20]], [[SN1.32]], [[JA450]], [[AN5.36]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN2.31]], [[AN4.73]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA85]]
> ◄  [[ma84-bdk]] 📜  [[ma86-bdk]] ►
