---
sutta_code: "SN21.6"
sutta_title:
  - "Lakuṇḍakabhaddiyasutta "
  - "Lakuṇṭaka Bhaddiya"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.6]]
> ◄  [[sn21.3-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn21.8-thanissaro]] ►

## SN21.6 Bhaddiya

## ## Bhaddiya Sutta


I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. Bhaddiya the Dwarf, following behind a large number of bhikkhus, was going to the Blessed One. From afar, the Blessed One saw Ven. Bhaddiya the Dwarf coming, following behind a large number of bhikkhus: ugly, unsightly, stunted, treated with condescension[1](#sn21.6note01) by most of the bhikkhus. On seeing him, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus, “bhikkhus, do you see that bhikkhu coming from afar, following behind a large number of bhikkhus: ugly, unsightly, stunted, treated with condescension by most of the bhikkhus?”

“Yes, lord.”

“That, bhikkhus, is a bhikkhu of great power, great might. The attainment already attained by that bhikkhu is not of a sort easily attained. And by means of it he has entered & remains in the supreme goal of the holy life for which clansmen rightly go forth from home into homelessness, directly knowing & realizing it for himself right in the here & now.”

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-Gone, the Teacher, said further:

Swans, cranes, & peacocks,

elephants & spotted antelope

all fear the lion

(though) in body there’s no comparison.

In the same way, among human beings,

even if one is small

but endowed in discernment,

one is great for that—

not the fool endowed in physique.[2](#sn21.6note02)

Notes

1. The Commentary notes that misbehaving bhikkhus liked to stroke his hands and catch hold of his ears.

[[ud7.5-thanissaro]] contains the same story, but with a different verse.

See also: [[ud7.1-thanissaro]], [[ud7.2-thanissaro]], [[ud7.5-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/thag-thanissaro-notes-fixed-FLAT/thag6-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.2]], [[SA1063]] | S ii 279 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.2]], [[SA1063]], [[JA202]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[UD7.5.UD76]], [[AN6.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.6]]
> ◄  [[sn21.3-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn21.8-thanissaro]] ►
