---
sutta_code: "SN21.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Kolitasutta "
  - "Kolita"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn21.2-thanissaro]] ►

## SN21.1 Kolita

## ## Kolita Sutta


I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. There Ven. Mahā Moggallāna addressed the bhikkhus, “Friend bhikkhus!”

“Yes, friend,” the bhikkhus responded to him.

Ven. Mahā Moggallāna said, “Friends, once as I was withdrawn in seclusion, this train of thought arose to my awareness, ‘“Noble silence, noble silence,” it is said. But what is noble silence?’ Then the thought occurred to me, ‘There is the case where a bhikkhu, with the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations,[1](#sn21.1note01) enters & remains in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of samādhi, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation—internal assurance. This is called noble silence.’ So, with the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, I entered & remained in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of samādhi, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation—internal assurance. While I remained in that (mental) dwelling, I was assailed by attention to perceptions dealing with directed thought.[2](#sn21.1note02)

“Then the Blessed One, coming to me through his (psychic) power, said, ‘Moggallāna. Moggallāna. Brahman, don’t be heedless of noble silence. Establish your mind in noble silence. Make your mind unified in noble silence. Concentrate your mind in noble silence.’ So at a later time, with the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, I entered & remained in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of samādhi, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation—internal assurance.

“When one, speaking rightly, would say of someone, ‘A disciple attained to greatness of direct knowledge through the assistance of the Teacher,’ it’s of me that one speaking rightly would say, ‘A disciple attained to greatness of direct knowledge through the assistance of the Teacher.’”

Notes

1. According to [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn44-thanissaro]], directed thought and evaluation constitute verbal fabrication, which is why the second jhāna—the level of samādhi in which these fabrications are stilled—is called noble silence.

2. [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an9/an9.34-thanissaro]] states that, for a person in the second jhāna, any attention to perceptions dealing with directed thought are an affliction.

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA501]] | S ii 273 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA501]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN40.2]], [[SN41.6]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn21.2-thanissaro]] ►
