---
sutta_code: "SN46.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Kāyasutta "
  - "Body"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.2]]
> ◄  [[sn46.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.3-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### I. Mountains — SN46.2: The Body
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, this body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue. In the same way, the five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

2And what fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? There is the feature of beauty. Frequent improper attention to that fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

3And what fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? There is the feature of harshness. Frequent improper attention to that fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

4And what fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? There is discontent, sloth, yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental sluggishness. Frequent improper attention to them fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

5And what fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? There is the unsettled mind. Frequent improper attention to that fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

6And what fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow? There are things that are grounds for doubt. Frequent improper attention to them fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

7This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue. In the same way, the five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

8This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue. In the same way, the seven awakening factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

9And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of mindfulness. Frequent proper attention to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

10And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and bright. Frequent proper attention to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

11And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are the elements of initiative, persistence, and exertion. Frequent proper attention to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

12And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of rapture. Frequent proper attention to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

13And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There is tranquility of the body and of the mind. Frequent proper attention to that fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

14And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are the foundation of serenity and freedom from distraction. Frequent proper attention to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

15And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of equanimity. Frequent proper attention to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

16This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue. In the same way, the seven awakening factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṁ kāyo āhāraṭṭhitiko, āhāraṁ paṭicca tiṭṭhati, anāhāro no tiṭṭhati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, pañca nīvaraṇā āhāraṭṭhitikā, āhāraṁ paṭicca tiṭṭhanti, anāhārā no tiṭṭhanti.

2Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā kāmacchandassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā kāmacchandassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? Atthi, bhikkhave, subhanimittaṁ. Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā kāmacchandassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā kāmacchandassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya.

3Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā byā pāda ssa uppādāya, uppannassa vā byā pāda ssa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? Atthi, bhikkhave, paṭighanimittaṁ. Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā byā pāda ssa uppādāya, uppannassa vā byā pāda ssa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya.

4Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā thinamiddhassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā thinamiddhassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? Atthi, bhikkhave, arati tandi vijambhitā bhattasammado cetaso ca līnattaṁ. Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā thinamiddhassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā thinamiddhassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya.

5Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā uddhaccakukkuccassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā uddhaccakukkuccassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? Atthi, bhikkhave, cetaso avūpasamo. Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā uddhaccakukkuccassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā uddhaccakukkuccassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya.

6Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannāya vā vicikicchāya uppādāya, uppannāya vā vicikicchāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? Atthi, bhikkhave, vicikicchāṭṭhānīyā dhammā. Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannāya vā vicikicchāya uppādāya, uppannāya vā vicikicchāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya.

7Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṁ kāyo āhāraṭṭhitiko, āhāraṁ paṭicca tiṭṭhati, anāhāro no tiṭṭhati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca nīvaraṇā āhāraṭṭhitikā, āhāraṁ paṭicca tiṭṭhanti, anāhārā no tiṭṭhanti.

8Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṁ kāyo āhāraṭṭhitiko, āhāraṁ paṭicca tiṭṭhati, anāhāro no tiṭṭhati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā āhāraṭṭhitikā, āhāraṁ paṭicca tiṭṭhanti, anāhārā no tiṭṭhanti.

9Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā satisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā satisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? Atthi, bhikkhave, satisambojjhaṅgaṭṭhānīyā dhammā. Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā satisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā satisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā.

10Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? Atthi, bhikkhave, kusalākusalā dhammā, sāvajjānavajjā dhammā, hīnapaṇītā dhammā, kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāgā dhammā. Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā.

11Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā vīriyasambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā vīriyasambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? Atthi, bhikkhave, ārambhadhātu nikkamadhātu parakkamadhātu. Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā vīriyasambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā vīriyasambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā.

12Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā pītisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā pītisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? Atthi, bhikkhave, pītisambojjhaṅgaṭṭhānīyā dhammā. Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā pītisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā pītisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā.

13Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā passaddhisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā passaddhisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? Atthi, bhikkhave, kāyapassaddhi, cittapassaddhi. Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā passaddhisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā passaddhisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā.

14Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā samādhisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā samādhisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? Atthi, bhikkhave, samathanimittaṁ abyagganimittaṁ. Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā samādhisambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā samādhisambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā.

15Ko ca, bhikkhave, āhāro anuppannassa vā upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā? Atthi, bhikkhave, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṭṭhānīyā dhammā. Tattha yonisomanasikārabahulīkāro – ayamāhāro anuppannassa vā upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa uppādāya, uppannassa vā upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa bhāvanāya pāripūriyā.

16Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ayaṁ kāyo āhāraṭṭhitiko, āhāraṁ paṭicca tiṭṭhati, anāhāro no tiṭṭhati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ime satta bojjhaṅgā āhāraṭṭhitikā, āhāraṁ paṭicca tiṭṭhanti, anāhārā no tiṭṭhantī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA715]] | S v 64 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA715]], [[SN46.51]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN5.51]], [[SN46.53]], [[SN46.51]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.2]]
> ◄  [[sn46.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.3-sujato-pali]] ►
