---
sutta_code: "SN46.41"
sutta_title:
  - "Vidhāsutta "
  - "Discriminations"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.41]]
> ◄  [[sn46.40-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.42-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### V. A Wheel Turning Monarch — SN46.41: Discriminations
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have given up the three discriminations have done so by developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors. All the ascetics and brahmins in the future who will give up the three discriminations will do so by developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors. All the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are giving up the three discriminations do so by developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors.

What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. All the ascetics and brahmins in the past … future … and present who give up the three discriminations do so by developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṁ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā tisso vidhā pajahiṁsu, sabbe te sattannaṁ bojjhaṅgānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṁ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā tisso vidhā pajahissanti, sabbe te sattannaṁ bojjhaṅgānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā tisso vidhā pajahanti, sabbe te sattannaṁ bojjhaṅgānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā.

Katamesaṁ sattannaṁ bojjhaṅgānaṁ? Satisambojjhaṅgassa … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgassa. Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, atītamaddhānaṁ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā tisso vidhā pajahiṁsu … pe … pajahissanti … pe … pajahanti, sabbe te imesaṁyeva sattannaṁ bojjhaṅgānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.41-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA730]] | S v 98 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA730]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN45.162]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.41]]
> ◄  [[sn46.40-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.42-sujato-pali]] ►
