---
sutta_code: "SN46.7"
sutta_title:
  - "Kūṭāgārasutta "
  - "The Peaked House"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.7]]
> ◄  [[sn46.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.8-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### I. Mountains — SN46.7: A Bungalow
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the rafters of a bungalow all slant, slope, and incline to the peak. In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

2And how does a bhikkhu who develops the seven awakening factors slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kūṭāgārassa yā kāci gopānasiyo, sabbā tā kūṭaninnā kūṭapoṇā kūṭapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.7-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 75 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.7]]
> ◄  [[sn46.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.8-sujato-pali]] ►
