---
sutta_code: "SN46.18"
sutta_title:
  - "Viraddhasutta "
  - "Neglected"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.18]]
> ◄  [[sn46.17-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.19-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### II. Sick — SN46.18: Missed Out
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, whoever has missed out on the seven awakening factors has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. Whoever has undertaken the seven awakening factors has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. What seven?

The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. Whoever has missed out on these seven awakening factors has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.

Whoever has undertaken these seven awakening factors has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.”

1"Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṁ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṁ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī.

Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo – yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime satta bojjhaṅgā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṁ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī.

Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime satta bojjhaṅgā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṁ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 82 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN45.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.18]]
> ◄  [[sn46.17-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.19-sujato-pali]] ►
