---
sutta_code: "SN46.21"
sutta_title:
  - "Bodhāyasutta "
  - "To Enlightenment"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.21]]
> ◄  [[sn46.20-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.22-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### III. With Udāyī — SN46.21: To Awakening
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha … and said to him:


2“Sir, they speak of the ‘awakening factors’. How are the awakening factors defined?”

“bhikkhu, they’re called awakening factors because they lead to awakening. A bhikkhu develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. They’re called awakening factors because they lead to awakening.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 


2"‘Bojjhaṅgā, bojjhaṅgā’ti, bhante, vuccanti. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, ‘bojjhaṅgā’ti vuccantī"ti?

"‘Bodhāya saṁvattantī’ti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā bojjhaṅgāti vuccanti. Idha, bhikkhu, satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. ‘Bodhāya saṁvattantī’ti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā ‘bojjhaṅgā’ti vuccantī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.21-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 83 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN45.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.21]]
> ◄  [[sn46.20-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.22-sujato-pali]] ►
