---
sutta_code: "SN46.27"
sutta_title:
  - "Taṇhānirodhasutta "
  - "The Cessation of Craving"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.27]]
> ◄  [[sn46.26-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.28-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### III. With Udāyī — SN46.27: The Cessation of Craving
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, you should develop the path and the practice that leads to the cessation of craving. And what is the path and the practice that leads to the cessation of craving? It is the seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to the cessation of craving?

2It’s when a bhikkhu develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. This is how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to lead to the cessation of craving.”

1"Yo, bhikkhave, maggo yā paṭipadā taṇhānirodhāya saṁvattati, taṁ maggaṁ taṁ paṭipadāṁ bhāvetha. Katamo ca, bhikkhave, maggo katamā ca paṭipadā taṇhānirodhāya saṁvattati? Yadidaṁ – satta bojjhaṅgā. Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo.

Kathaṁ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā kathaṁ bahulīkatā taṇhānirodhāya saṁvattanti?

2Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṁ bahulīkatā taṇhānirodhāya saṁvattantī"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.27-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA729]] | S v 87 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA729]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.27]]
> ◄  [[sn46.26-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.28-sujato-pali]] ►
