---
sutta_code: "SN46.13"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyasūriyūpamasutta "
  - "The Simile of the Sun (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.13]]
> ◄  [[sn46.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.14-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### II. Sick — SN46.13: The Simile of the Sun (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In the same way, for a bhikkhu proper attention is the forerunner and precursor of the arising of the seven awakening factors. A bhikkhu accomplished in proper attention can expect to develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors.

2And how does a bhikkhu with proper attention develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how a bhikkhu with proper attention develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors.”

1"Sūriyassa, bhikkhave, udayato etaṁ pubbaṅgamaṁ etaṁ pubbanimittaṁ, yadidaṁ – aruṇuggaṁ; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno sattannaṁ bojjhaṅgānaṁ uppādāya etaṁ pubbaṅgamaṁ etaṁ pubbanimittaṁ, yadidaṁ – yonisomanasikāro. Yonisomanasikārasampannassetaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – satta bojjhaṅge bhāvessati, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarissati.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yonisomanasikārasampanno satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaroti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yonisomanasikārasampanno satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarotī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.13-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 79 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.13]]
> ◄  [[sn46.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.14-sujato-pali]] ►
