---
sutta_code: "SN46.38"
sutta_title:
  - "Āvaraṇanīvaraṇasutta "
  - "Without Hindrances"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.38]]
> ◄  [[sn46.37-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.39-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### IV. Hindrances — SN46.38: Obstacles
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, there are these five obstacles and hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. What five? Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are the five obstacles and hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom.

2There are these seven awakening factors that are not obstacles, hindrances, or corruptions of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or corruptions of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom.

3bhikkhus, sometimes a bhikkhu pays heed, pays attention, engages wholeheartedly, and lends an ear to the teaching. At such a time the five hindrances are absent, and the seven awakening factors are fully developed.

4What are the five hindrances that are absent? Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are the five hindrances that are absent.


5And what are the seven awakening factors that are fully developed? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These are the seven awakening factors that are fully developed.

Sometimes a bhikkhu pays heed, pays attention, engages wholeheartedly, and lends an ear to the teaching. At such a time the five hindrances are absent, and the seven awakening factors are fully developed.”

1"Pañcime, bhikkhave, āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso upakkilesā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā. Katame pañca? Kāmacchando, bhikkhave, āvaraṇo nīvaraṇo cetaso upakkileso paññāya dubbalīkaraṇo. Byāpādo, bhikkhave, āvaraṇo nīvaraṇo cetaso upakkileso paññāya dubbalīkaraṇo. Thinamiddhaṁ, bhikkhave, āvaraṇaṁ nīvaraṇaṁ cetaso upakkilesaṁ paññāya dubbalīkaraṇaṁ. Uddhaccakukkuccaṁ, bhikkhave, āvaraṇaṁ nīvaraṇaṁ cetaso upakkilesaṁ paññāya dubbalīkaraṇaṁ. Vicikicchā, bhikkhave, āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso upakkilesā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā. Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso upakkilesā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā.

2Sattime, bhikkhave, bojjhaṅgā anāvaraṇā anīvaraṇā cetaso anupakkilesā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṁvattanti. Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo, bhikkhave, anāvaraṇo anīvaraṇo cetaso anupakkileso bhāvito bahulīkato vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṁvattati … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo, bhikkhave, anāvaraṇo anīvaraṇo cetaso anupakkileso bhāvito bahulīkato vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṁvattati. Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā anāvaraṇā anīvaraṇā cetaso anupakkilesā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṁvattantīti.

3Yasmiṁ, bhikkhave, samaye ariyasāvako aṭṭhiṁ katvā manasi katvā sabbaṁ cetaso samannāharitvā ohitasoto dhammaṁ suṇāti, imassa pañca nīvaraṇā tasmiṁ samaye na honti. Satta bojjhaṅgā tasmiṁ samaye bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti.

4Katame pañca nīvaraṇā tasmiṁ samaye na honti? Kāmacchandanīvaraṇaṁ tasmiṁ samaye na hoti, byā pāda nīvaraṇaṁ tasmiṁ samaye na hoti, thinamiddhanīvaraṇaṁ tasmiṁ samaye na hoti, uddhaccakukkuccanīvaraṇaṁ tasmiṁ samaye na hoti, vicikicchānīvaraṇaṁ tasmiṁ samaye na hoti. Imassa pañca nīvaraṇā tasmiṁ samaye na honti.


5Katame satta bojjhaṅgā tasmiṁ samaye bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti? Satisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṁ samaye bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchati … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo tasmiṁ samaye bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchati. Ime satta bojjhaṅgā tasmiṁ samaye bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti.

Yasmiṁ, bhikkhave, samaye ariyasāvako aṭṭhiṁ katvā manasi katvā sabbaṁ cetaso samannāharitvā ohitasoto dhammaṁ suṇāti, imassa pañca nīvaraṇā tasmiṁ samaye na honti. Ime satta bojjhaṅgā tasmiṁ samaye bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchantī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.38-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA709]] | S v 94 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA709]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN46.53]], [[SN46.51]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.38]]
> ◄  [[sn46.37-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.39-sujato-pali]] ►
