---
sutta_code: "SN46.39"
sutta_title:
  - "Rukkhasutta "
  - "Trees"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.39]]
> ◄  [[sn46.38-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.40-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### IV. Hindrances — SN46.39: Trees
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are large trees with tiny seeds and big trunks, which grow up and around other trees as parasites. The trees they engulf break apart, collapse, and fall. And what are those large trees with tiny seeds and big trunks? The bodhi, banyan, wavy leaf fig, cluster fig, Moreton Bay fig, and wood apple. These are the large trees with tiny seeds and big trunks, which grow up and around other trees as parasites. The trees they engulf break apart, collapse, and fall.

In the same way, take some gentlemen who have gone forth from the lay life to homelessness, abandoning sensual pleasures. But beset by sensual pleasures that are similar, or even worse, they break apart, collapse, and fall.


2There are these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom. What five? Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are the five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom.

3These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or parasites of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or parasites of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom.”

1"Santi, bhikkhave, mahārukkhā aṇubījā mahākāyā rukkhānaṁ ajjhāruhā, yehi rukkhā ajjhārūḷhā obhaggavibhaggā vipatitā senti. Katame ca te, bhikkhave, mahārukkhā aṇubījā mahākāyā rukkhānaṁ ajjhāruhā, yehi rukkhā ajjhārūḷhā obhaggavibhaggā vipatitā senti? Assattho, nigrodho, pilakkho, udumbaro, kacchako, kapitthano – ime kho te, bhikkhave, mahārukkhā aṇubījā mahākāyā rukkhānaṁ ajjhāruhā, yehi rukkhā ajjhārūḷhā obhaggavibhaggā vipatitā senti.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco kulaputto yādisake kāme ohāya agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajito hoti, so tādisakehi kāmehi tato vā pāpiṭṭhatarehi obhaggavibhaggo vipatito seti.


2Pañcime, bhikkhave, āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso ajjhāruhā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā. Katame pañca? Kāmacchando, bhikkhave, āvaraṇo nīvaraṇo cetaso ajjhāruho paññāya dubbalīkaraṇo. Byāpādo, bhikkhave, āvaraṇo nīvaraṇo cetaso ajjhāruho paññāya dubbalīkaraṇo. Thinamiddhaṁ, bhikkhave, āvaraṇaṁ nīvaraṇaṁ cetaso ajjhāruhaṁ paññāya dubbalīkaraṇaṁ. Uddhaccakukkuccaṁ, bhikkhave, āvaraṇaṁ nīvaraṇaṁ cetaso ajjhāruhaṁ paññāya dubbalīkaraṇaṁ. Vicikicchā, bhikkhave, āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso ajjhāruhā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā. Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca āvaraṇā nīvaraṇā cetaso ajjhāruhā paññāya dubbalīkaraṇā.

3Sattime, bhikkhave, bojjhaṅgā anāvaraṇā anīvaraṇā cetaso anajjhāruhā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṁvattanti. Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo, bhikkhave, anāvaraṇo anīvaraṇo cetaso anajjhāruho bhāvito bahulīkato vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṁvattati … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo, bhikkhave, anāvaraṇo anīvaraṇo cetaso anajjhāruho bhāvito bahulīkato vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṁvattati. Ime kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā anāvaraṇā anīvaraṇā cetaso anajjhāruhā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiphalasacchikiriyāya saṁvattantī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.39-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA708]] | S v 96 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN46.37]], [[AN5.51]], [[SA707]], [[SN46.34]], [[SN46.55]], [[SA708]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.39]]
> ◄  [[sn46.38-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.40-sujato-pali]] ►
