---
sutta_code: "SN46.29"
sutta_title:
  - "Ekadhammasutta "
  - "One Thing"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.29]]
> ◄  [[sn46.28-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.30-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### III. With Udāyī — SN46.29: One Thing
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and cultivated like this, leads to giving up the things that are prone to being fettered like the seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the things that are prone to being fettered?

2It’s when a bhikkhu develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the things that are prone to being fettered.

3And what are the things that are prone to being fettered? The eye is something that’s prone to being fettered. This is where these fetters, shackles, and attachments arise. The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is something that’s prone to being fettered. This is where these fetters, shackles, and attachments arise. These are called the things that are prone to being fettered.”

1"Nāhaṁ, bhikkhave, aññaṁ ekadhammampi samanupassāmi, yo evaṁ bhāvito bahulīkato saṁyojanīyānaṁ dhammānaṁ pahānāya saṁvattati, yathayidaṁ, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā. Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo.

Kathaṁ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā kathaṁ bahulīkatā saṁyojanīyānaṁ dhammānaṁ pahānāya saṁvattanti?

2Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṁ bahulīkatā saṁyojanīyānaṁ dhammānaṁ pahānāya saṁvattanti.

3Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṁyojanīyā dhammā? Cakkhu, bhikkhave, saṁyojanīyo dhammo. Etthete uppajjanti saṁyojanavinibandhā ajjhosānā … pe … jivhā saṁyojanīyā dhammā. Etthete uppajjanti saṁyojanavinibandhā ajjhosānā … pe … mano saṁyojanīyo dhammo. Etthete uppajjanti saṁyojanavinibandhā ajjhosānā. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṁyojanīyā dhammā"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.29-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA716]] | S v 88 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA716]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.29]]
> ◄  [[sn46.28-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.30-sujato-pali]] ►
