---
sutta_code: "SN46.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Upavānasutta "
  - "Upavaṇa"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.8]]
> ◄  [[sn46.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.9-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### I. Mountains — SN46.8: With Upavāna
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At one time the venerables Upavāna and Sāriputta were staying near Kosambi, in Ghosita’s Monastery. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable Upavāna and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Upavāna:

2“Reverend Upavāna, can a bhikkhu know by investigating inside themselves that the seven awakening factors are well implemented so that they lead to living at ease?”

“They can, Reverend Sāriputta.


3As a bhikkhu rouses up the awakening factor of mindfulness, they understand: ‘My mind is well freed. I’ve eradicated dullness and drowsiness, and eliminated restlessness and remorse. My energy is roused up, and my mind is sharply focused, not sluggish.’ … As they rouse up the awakening factor of equanimity, they understand: ‘My mind is well freed. I’ve eradicated dullness and drowsiness, and eliminated restlessness and remorse. My energy is roused up, and my mind is sharply focused, not sluggish.’

That’s how a bhikkhu can know by investigating inside themselves that the seven awakening factors are well implemented so that they lead to living at ease.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ āyasmā ca upavāno āyasmā ca sāriputto kosambiyaṁ vihāranti ghositārāme. Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāyanhasamayaṁ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā upavāno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā upavānena saddhiṁ sammodi. Sammodanīyaṁ kathaṁ sāraṇīyaṁ vītisāretvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṁ upavānaṁ etadavoca: 

2"Jāneyya nu kho, āvuso upavāna, bhikkhu ‘paccattaṁ yonisomanasikārā evaṁ susamāraddhā me satta bojjhaṅgā phāsuvihārāya saṁvattantī’"ti?

"Jāneyya kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu ‘paccattaṁ yonisomanasikārā evaṁ susamāraddhā me satta bojjhaṅgā phāsuvihārāya saṁvattantī’"ti.


3"Satisambojjhaṅgaṁ kho, āvuso, bhikkhu ārabbhamāno pajānāti ‘cittañca me suvimuttaṁ, thinamiddhañca me susamūhataṁ, uddhaccakukkuccañca me suppaṭivinītaṁ, āraddhañca me vīriyaṁ, aṭṭhiṁ katvā manasi karomi, no ca līnan’ti … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ āvuso, bhikkhu ārabbhamāno pajānāti ‘cittañca me suvimuttaṁ, thinamiddhañca me susamūhataṁ, uddhaccakukkuccañca me suppaṭivinītaṁ, āraddhañca me vīriyaṁ, aṭṭhiṁ katvā manasi karomi, no ca līnan’"ti.

"Evaṁ kho, āvuso sāriputta, bhikkhu jāneyya ‘paccattaṁ yonisomanasikārā evaṁ susamāraddhā me satta bojjhaṅgā phāsuvihārāya saṁvattantī’"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA719]] | S v 76 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA719]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.8]]
> ◄  [[sn46.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.9-sujato-pali]] ►
