---
sutta_code: "SN46.19"
sutta_title:
  - "Ariyasutta "
  - "Noble"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.19]]
> ◄  [[sn46.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.20-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### II. Sick — SN46.19: Noble
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, when these seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one who practices them to the complete ending of suffering. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. When these seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one who practices them to the complete ending of suffering.”

1"Sattime, bhikkhave, bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ariyā niyyānikā nīyanti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāya. Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo – ime kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ariyā niyyānikā nīyanti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 82 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN45.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.19]]
> ◄  [[sn46.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.20-sujato-pali]] ►
