---
sutta_code: "SN46.28"
sutta_title:
  - "Nibbedhabhāgiyasutta "
  - "Partaking of Penetration"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.28]]
> ◄  [[sn46.27-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.29-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### III. With Udāyī — SN46.28: Helping Penetration
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you a path that helps penetration. Listen …

And what is the path that helps penetration? It is the seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.”


When he said this, Udāyī said to him:

“Sir, how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to penetration?”


2“Udāyī, it’s when a bhikkhu develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. With a mind that has developed the awakening factor of mindfulness, they penetrate and shatter the mass of greed, the mass of hate, and the mass of delusion for the first time. …

A bhikkhu develops the awakening factor of equanimity, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. With a mind that has developed the awakening factor of equanimity, they penetrate and shatter the mass of greed, the mass of hate, and the mass of delusion for the first time.

This is how are the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to lead to penetration.”

1"Nibbedhabhāgiyaṁ vo, bhikkhave, maggaṁ desessāmi; taṁ suṇātha.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, nibbedhabhāgiyo maggo? Yadidaṁ – satta bojjhaṅgā. Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo"ti.


Evaṁ vutte, āyasmā udāyī bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"Kathaṁ bhāvitā nu kho, bhante, satta bojjhaṅgā kathaṁ bahulīkatā nibbedhāya saṁvattantī"ti?


2"Idha, udāyi, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ vipulaṁ mahaggataṁ appamāṇaṁ abyāpajjaṁ. So satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāvitena cittena anibbiddhapubbaṁ appadālitapubbaṁ lobhakkhandhaṁ nibbijjhati padāleti; anibbiddhapubbaṁ appadālitapubbaṁ dosakkhandhaṁ nibbijjhati padāleti; anibbiddhapubbaṁ appadālitapubbaṁ mohakkhandhaṁ nibbijjhati padāleti … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ vipulaṁ mahaggataṁ appamāṇaṁ abyāpajjaṁ.

So upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāvitena cittena anibbiddhapubbaṁ appadālitapubbaṁ lobhakkhandhaṁ nibbijjhati padāleti; anibbiddhapubbaṁ appadālitapubbaṁ dosakkhandhaṁ nibbijjhati padāleti; anibbiddhapubbaṁ appadālitapubbaṁ mohakkhandhaṁ nibbijjhati padāleti.

Evaṁ bhāvitā kho, udāyi, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṁ bahulīkatā nibbedhāya saṁvattantī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.28-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 87 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.28]]
> ◄  [[sn46.27-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.29-sujato-pali]] ►
