---
sutta_code: "SN46.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Bhikkhusutta "
  - "Bhikkhu"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.5]]
> ◄  [[sn46.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.6-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### I. Mountains — SN46.5: A bhikkhu
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha … and asked him: “Sir, they speak of the ‘awakening factors’. How are the awakening factors defined?”

“bhikkhu, they’re called awakening factors because they lead to awakening.


A bhikkhu develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. As they develop the seven awakening factors, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’

They’re called awakening factors because they lead to awakening.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "‘bojjhaṅgā, bojjhaṅgā’ti, bhante, vuccanti. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, ‘bojjhaṅgā’ti vuccantī"ti?

"Bodhāya saṁvattantīti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā ‘bojjhaṅgā’ti vuccanti.


Idha, bhikkhu, satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Tassime satta bojjhaṅge bhāvayato kāmāsavāpi cittaṁ vimuccati, bhavāsavāpi cittaṁ vimuccati, avijjāsavāpi cittaṁ vimuccati. Vimuttasmiṁ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṁ hoti. ‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti.

Bodhāya saṁvattantīti, bhikkhu, tasmā ‘bojjhaṅgā’ti vuccantī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA733]], [[SA737]] | S v 72 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA737]], [[SA733]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.5]]
> ◄  [[sn46.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn46.6-sujato-pali]] ►
