---
sutta_code: "EA43.4"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "EA 43.4 "
  - "4. ?"
nikaya:
  - "EA "
  - "Ekottara Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "EA43"
  - "T125"
  - "EA43"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Diligence"
sutta_topic:
  - "Spiritual search"
sutta_training:
  - "Paññā"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Practical"
sutta_prominence:
  - ""
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Brahmins"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[EA43.4]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[EA43.4]], [[MN30]], [[MN29]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[EA]] | ◄  [[EA43.3]]  🌐 [[EA43.5]] ►

# EA43.4 - EA 43.4 - 4. ?
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> Similar to the previous. After the incident with Devadatta, the Buddha  cautions the bhikkhus against becoming complacent and points to liberation as the true heart of the teaching
The Buddha  compares the rewards of the practice to different parts of a large tree, with total release the most valuable part of the tree: the heartwood

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Gentleman who has gone forth from the lay life to homelessness, thinking, 
‘I’m swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I’m mired in suffering. Hopefully I can find an end to this entire mass of suffering
Things that are better and finer than knowledge and vision
> 
> spiritual life is not lived for the sake of possessions, honor, and popularity, or for accomplishment in ethics, or for accomplishment in immersion, or for knowledge and vision. 
Rather, the goal, heartwood, and final end of the spiritual life is the unshakable freedom of heart.
4 jhanas, 4 immaterial jhanas and cessation of perceptions and feelings. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an end
> 

> [!info] Similes
> Heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, and branches and leaves, like the benefits of bhikkhu life

---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea43.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA43.4]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA43.4]], [[MN30]], [[MN29]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BEA43.4%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BEA43.4%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BEA43.4%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BEA43.4%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Aea43.4-%20-file%3A%22EA43.3%22%20-file%3A%22EA43.5%22%20-file%3A%22EA43.4%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ea43.4/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[EA]] | ◄  [[EA43.3]]  🌐 [[EA43.5]] ►
