---
sutta_code: "EA24.8"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "EA 24.8 "
  - "8. Long Life"
nikaya:
  - "EA "
  - "Ekottara Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "EA24"
  - "T125"
  - "EA24"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Ill will"
sutta_topic:
  - "Conflicts end"
sutta_training:
  - "Sīla"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[EA24.8]], [[MA185]], [[MA72]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[EA24.8]], [[MA185]], [[MN128]], [[MA72]], [[PLI-TV-KD10]], [[JA371]], [[JA428]], [[DHP\|DHP3]], [[DHP\|DHP328]], [[SNP1.3]], [[DHP\|DHP329]], [[DHP\|DHP330]], [[DHP\|DHP4]], [[DHP\|DHP5]], [[DHP\|DHP6]], [[THAG4]].3, [[THAG8]].1, [[UD5.9]], [[MN31]], [[PLI-TV-KD10]], [[UD4.5]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[EA]] | ◄  [[EA24.7]]  🌐 [[EA24.10]] ►

# EA24.8 - EA 24.8 - 8. Long Life
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> A second discourse set at the quarrel of kosambi, this depicts the Buddha , having failed to achieve reconciliation between the disputing bhikkhus, leaving the monastery. He spends time in the wilderness before encountering an inspiring community of practicing monks. There he discusses in detail obstacles to meditation that he encountered before awakening

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> He abused me, he hit me! 
He beat me, he took from me!’ 
Those who cling to hate like this 
Never settle their enmity. .Those Who never cling to hate 
Always settle their enmity
If you find an alert companion, 
A wise and virtuous friend, 
Then, overcoming all challenges, 
Wander with them, joyful and mindful     living in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes
When I understood that doubt, loss of focus, dullness and drowsiness, terror, excitement, discomfort,excessive energy, overly lax energy, longing,perception of diversity, and excessive concentration on forms are corruptions of the mind, I gave them up
> 
> For enmity in this world 
Is never settled by enmity. 
It’s only settled by love: 
This is an ancient principle  it’s better to wander alone, 
For a fool can never be a friend. 
Wander alone and do no wrong, 
At ease like a tusker in the wild
 consistently treat these venerables with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private. I Think: ‘why don’t I set aside my own ideas and just go along with these venerables’ 
I Developed immersion while placing the mind and keeping it connected; without placing the mind, but just keeping it connected; without placing the mind or keeping it connected; with rapture; without rapture; with pleasure; with equanimity, when I had developed immersion in these ways, the knowledge and vision arose in me: ‘my freedom is unshakable
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA24.8]], [[MA185]], [[MA72]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA24.8]], [[MA185]], [[MN128]], [[MA72]], [[PLI-TV-KD10]], [[JA371]], [[JA428]], [[DHP\|DHP3]], [[DHP\|DHP328]], [[SNP1.3]], [[DHP\|DHP329]], [[DHP\|DHP330]], [[DHP\|DHP4]], [[DHP\|DHP5]], [[DHP\|DHP6]], [[THAG4]].3, [[THAG8]].1, [[UD5.9]], [[MN31]], [[PLI-TV-KD10]], [[UD4.5]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BEA24.8%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BEA24.8%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BEA24.8%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BEA24.8%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Aea24.8-%20-file%3A%22EA24.7%22%20-file%3A%22EA24.10%22%20-file%3A%22EA24.8%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ea24.8/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[EA]] | ◄  [[EA24.7]]  🌐 [[EA24.10]] ►
