---
sutta_code: "EA10.2"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 10.2 "
  - "No Pride (2)"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA10]]  / 🌐 [[EA10.2]]
> ◄  [[ea10.1-patton]] 📜  [[ea10.3-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 10: The Guarded Mind

2. No Pride (2)
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “One must develop one thing and disseminate one thing. Having cultivated one thing and disseminated one thing, they’ll then attain spiritual knowledge, pacify their conditioned thinking, attain the fruits of the ascetic, and reach the abode of _nirvāṇa_. What is that one thing? It’s the practice of carefulness in the good teachings.
3. “What is this practice of carefulness? It means not harassing any sentient being, not harming any sentient being, and not troubling any sentient being. This is called the practice of carefulness. What’s called the good teachings? It means the noble eightfold path, which is right view, right method, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right suppression, right mindfulness, and right _samādhi_.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] These are the good teachings.”
4. The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:
- “Being generous to all sentient beings    
    Is not the same as giving Dharma to someone.    
    Although being generous has its merit,    
    Giving Dharma to one person is greater.”
5. “Therefore, bhikkhus, one should cultivate the good teaching. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
6. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.564a4-17]. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _right view … right samādhi_. C. 等見⋯等定. The C. lit. reads “equal” rather than “right” in this _sūtra_. This is likely because of confusion in G. between S. _samyak_ and S. _sama_, which perhaps led to ambiguous readings in that language. There are also a couple less standard translations of “intention” and “effort,” which are rendered here as “method” (方便) and “discipline” (治). 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 20 March 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea10.2-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA10]]  / 🌐 [[EA10.2]]
> ◄  [[ea10.1-patton]] 📜  [[ea10.3-patton]] ►
