---
sutta_code: "EA10.3"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 10.3 "
  - "Recollecting Generosity"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA10]]  / 🌐 [[EA10.3]]
> ◄  [[ea10.2-patton]] 📜  [[ea10.4-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 10: The Guarded Mind

3. Recollecting Generosity
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “How should one investigate donors and almsgivers?”<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2]
The bhikkhus said to the Bhagavān, “The Bhagavān is the king of teachings! Please, Bhagavān, teach the bhikkhus about the meaning of this. Once we’ve heard it, the bhikkhus will approve of it.”
3. The Bhagavān then told the bhikkhus, “Listen closely! Listen closely, and consider it well. I will discern the meaning of this for you.”
They replied, “Yes, Bhagavān!” The bhikkhus then accepted the teaching from the Bhagavān.
4. The Bhagavān told them, “A donor or almsgiver should be respectful like a devoted son who supports and helps his parents. Increasing the five aggregates, he manifests various aims in this land of Jambudvīpa.<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3] Examine a donor’s ability to achieve human precepts, learning, _samādhi_, and wisdom. bhikkhus, many are the benefits of the three jewels when they have no obstructions for those who can give you clothing, meals, furnishings, lodging, and medicine for illnesses.
5. “Therefore, bhikkhus, one should have kind thoughts towards a donor. Never forget small favors, not to mention the large ones. Always be kind to those donors and teach them pure conduct in body, speech, and thought, which cannot be estimated or delimited. Kindness in physical action, kindness in verbal action, and kindness in mental action ensures that the gifts that donors give will never be fruitless. They will obtain great fruit, achieve great fortune, and possess great fame that’s heard throughout the world and that has the Dharma flavor of sweet dew. Thus, you bhikkhus should train yourselves.”
6. The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:
- “Generosity achieves great riches,    
    And it accomplishes one’s wishes, too.    
    Neither the king nor bandits    
    Can take that away from you.
- Generosity gains the royal status    
    In a line of noble wheel-turning kings.    
    Being replete with the seven treasures    
    Is the result of past generosity.
- Generosity achieves a god’s body,    
    Wearing a crown of various jewels    
    And roaming with a harem of women.    
    That’s a reward of past generosity.
- A donor becomes Śakra the Lord of Gods.    
    That god king’s authority is abundant,    
    And he’s adorned with a thousand eyes.    
    That’s a reward of past generosity.
- Generosity achieves the Buddha’s path.    
    Endowed with the thirty-two signs,    
    They turn the unsurpassed Dharma wheel.    
    That’s a reward of past generosity.”
7. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.564a18-b18]. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _donors and almsgivers_. C. 檀越、施主. These two terms are synonyms that can both translate S. _dānapati_, which means a lay supporter who makes donations to the Saṅgha. I’ve chosen a couple equivalent English expressions. [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: _Jambudvīpa_. C. 閻浮利. The C. transliterates something like Jambuliva or Jamburiva (without the final syllable). Standard G. would be Jaṃbudiva, but EĀ frequently converts _-d-_ to _-l-_ or _-r-_. C. speakers had difficulty distinguishing the two sounds, so it’s difficult to tell which. Brough (p. 96) notes that _-d-_ and _-r-_ do appear interchangeable in some G. texts. I’ve adopted the S. equivalent. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 23 March 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea10.3-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA10]]  / 🌐 [[EA10.3]]
> ◄  [[ea10.2-patton]] 📜  [[ea10.4-patton]] ►
