---
sutta_code: "EA10.8"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 10.8 "
  - "Māra the Wicked One"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA10]]  / 🌐 [[EA10.8]]
> ◄  [[ea10.7-patton]] 📜  [[ea10.9-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 10: The Guarded Mind

8. Māra the Wicked One
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “If someone accepts one thing and doesn’t part with one thing, then Māra the Wicked One won’t be able to get an advantage over them. He won’t be able to come and harass them, either. What is that one thing? It’s virtuous, meritorious deeds. Why is that?
3. “I recall in the past when I was sitting under the tree of awakening with the bodhisattvas who had gathered in one place. Deceitful Māra the Wicked One led an army numbering in the hundreds of thousands of millions. His soldiers had all sorts of indescribable forms with animal heads and human bodies. The gods, _nāga_s, _yakṣa_s, _asura_s, _garuḍa_s, and _mahoraga_s all came and assembled.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2]
4. “Māra the Wicked One then said to me, ‘Ascetic, I’ll quickly throw you to the ground!’ But the Buddha defeated that Māra foe with merit, virtue, and great power. His impurities being extinguished and having no defilement, he then achieved the unsurpassed and true awakening.
5. “bhikkhus, one should contemplate the meaning of this. Deceitful Māra the Wicked One can’t find an advantage over a monk who has perfected his virtue, nor can he ruin his virtue.”
6. The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:
- “Someone with merits is happy;    
    Someone lacking merits will suffer.    
    In this life and the next,    
    Making merit brings happiness.
7. “Therefore, bhikkhus, don’t be cautious about making merit. [Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.]”
8. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.565c14-6a1]. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: This scene sounds very much like the one we find in the later biographical epics like the _Lalitavistara_ and _Buddhacarita_, though it includes more details in common with the former than the later. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 2 April 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea10.8-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA10]]  / 🌐 [[EA10.8]]
> ◄  [[ea10.7-patton]] 📜  [[ea10.9-patton]] ►
