---
sutta_code: "EA10.10"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 10.10 "
  - "One Person"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA10]]  / 🌐 [[EA10.10]]
> ◄  [[ea10.9-patton]] 📜  [[ea11.1-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 10: The Guarded Mind

10. One Person
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “When one person appears in the world, it increases the life spans of sentient beings and makes their complexions brighter, their health more vigorous, their happiness unsurpassed, and their voices gentle. Who is that one person? It’s the Tathāgata, the Arhat, and the Completely Awakened One. He is that one person who appears in the world and increases the life spans of sentient beings and makes their complexions brighter, their health more vigorous, their happiness unsurpassed, and their voices gentle.
3. “Therefore, bhikkhus, always focus and unify your mind on recollecting the Buddha. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
4. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
Summary Verse
- Two on no pride, recollecting generosity,    
    Two on giving, the stingy and the tireless,    
    Merits of giving, Māra the Wicked One,    
    Bad destinies, and one person.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.566a13-23]. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 2 April 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea10.10-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA10]]  / 🌐 [[EA10.10]]
> ◄  [[ea10.9-patton]] 📜  [[ea11.1-patton]] ►
