---
sutta_code: "EA11.8"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 11.8 "
  - "Alms (2)"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA11]]  / 🌐 [[EA11.8]]
> ◄  [[ea11.6-patton]] 📜  [[ea11.9-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 11: The Non-Returner

8. Alms (2)
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “Someone was thinking in this assembly. Even if their lives would end, they wouldn’t have spoken falsely to the assembly. On some other occasion, I examined this person, and they had become obsessed with thoughts about valuable things. Then, they spoke falsely to the great assembly. Why was that? bhikkhus, obsessions with valuable things are very difficult to abandon. They cause people to fall to the three bad destinations and not reach the unconditioned state.
3. “Therefore, bhikkhus, one must abandon these thoughts that have arisen. If they have yet to arise, then don’t create anymore thoughts that are obsessed with valuable things. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
4. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.567a4-13]. This _sūtra_ and the previous one are very similar in subject and format to [SN 17.11-20], but these _sūtra_s don’t provide specific examples of valuable things. See the notes to the previous _sūtra_ for more comments about these _sūtra_s and their parallels. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 7 May 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea11.8-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA11]]  / 🌐 [[EA11.8]]
> ◄  [[ea11.6-patton]] 📜  [[ea11.9-patton]] ►
