---
sutta_code: "EA11.5"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 11.5 "
  - "Heart"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA11]]  / 🌐 [[EA11.5]]
> ◄  [[ea11.3-patton]] 📜  [[ea11.6-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 11: The Non-Returner

5. Heart
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “From the start, I don’t see in this assembly a single thing that’s uncontrollable and which is sure to bring a result of suffering when it’s difficult to control. That thing is the heart. bhikkhus, this heart is uncontrollable. When it’s difficult to gain control of it, it surely brings a result of suffering.
3. “Therefore, bhikkhus, one should discern their heart. They should pay attention to their heart and be well aware of its roots of goodness. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
4. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.566c9-15]. This and the next _sūtra_ are similar to those found in [AN 1.21-30]. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 8 April 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea11.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA11.5]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA11.5]], [[AN1.29]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA11]]  / 🌐 [[EA11.5]]
> ◄  [[ea11.3-patton]] 📜  [[ea11.6-patton]] ►
