---
sutta_code: "EA12.5"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 12.5 "
  - "Praise and Slander"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA12]]  / 🌐 [[EA12.5]]
> ◄  [[ea12.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea12.6-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 12: The Single-Entry Path

5. Praise and Slander
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “Those who praise forest dwellers have praised me. Why is that? Because now I’m always praising forest dwellers. Those who slander forest dwellers then have slandered me.
3. “Those who praise soliciting alms have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who solicit alms. Those who slander soliciting alms have slandered me.
4. “Those who praise sitting in solitude have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who sit in solitude. Those who slander sitting in solitude have slandered me.
5. “Those who praise dwelling in one place for one sitting have praised me.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] Why is that? I’m always praising those who dwell in one place for one sitting. Those who slander dwelling in one place for one sitting have slandered me.
6. “If someone praises sitting under a tree, that’s no different than praising me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who sit under trees. If someone slanders someone for sitting under a tree, then they have slandered me.
7. “Those who praise sitting on open ground have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who sit on open ground. Those who slander someone for sitting on open ground have slandered me.
8. “Those who praise living in uninhabited places have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who live in uninhabited places. Those who slander someone for living in an uninhabited place have slandered me.
9. “Those who praise wearing the five-piece robe have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who wear five-piece robes. Those who slander someone for wearing the five-piece robe have slandered me.
10. “Those who praise keeping three garments have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who keep three garments. Those who slander someone for keeping three garments have slandered me.
11. “Those who praise sitting in charnel grounds have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who sit in charnel grounds. Those who slander someone for sitting in a charnel ground have slandered me.
12. “Those who praise having a single meal have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who take a single meal. Those who slander someone for taking a single meal have slandered me.
13. “Those who praise eating at midday have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising those who eat at midday. Those who slander someone for eating at midday have slandered me.
14. “Those who praise the ascetic practices have praised me. Why is that? I’m always praising the ascetic practices. Those who slander someone because of the ascetic practices have slandered me.
15. “Now, I teach the bhikkhus, ‘Someone should train like Mahākāśyapa and omit nothing.’ Why is that? These are the practices of the monk Kāśyapa.
16. “Therefore, bhikkhus, always train the way Mahākāśyapa does. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
17. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.569c13-70a22]. Although this _sūtra_ doesn’t appear to have a direct parallel, we do find similar material in SĀ 41.6 (1141), T100.116, and SN 16.5, where Kāśyapa says that he praises the ascetic practices. These are parallels to the next _sūtra_, EĀ 12.6, which doesn’t depict Kāśyapa as praising these things. Rather, he is praised for practicing them when the Buddha allows him to retire in his old age. The praising of the practices occurs instead here in the present _sūtra_, which mentions Kāśyapa at the end. It would appear that the Theravāda and Sarvāstivāda traditions may have combined elements of _sūtra_s like EĀ 12.5 and 12.6. The older _sūtra_s in those traditions would not have been identical to those here in the EĀ version, however, since their lists of the ascetic practices are different than the one we find here. It’s notable that a list of twelve ascetic practices similar to this one is found in the Mahīśāsaka Vinaya (cf. T1421.22.26a18), and there’s a short Mahāyāna _sūtra_ on the subject (T783) that appears inspired by these early _sūtra_s. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _dwell in one place for one sitting_. C. 一坐一食. The next _sūtra_, which lists the same ascetic practices as found here, has 一處一坐 instead of 一坐一食 for this item, and it includes a brief gloss. This makes better sense given that one of the later items below is taking a single meal, which would seem to duplicate this one. I’ve decided to translate the version in EĀ 12.6. The uncorrected Taisho reading would be “taking a single meal in one sitting” (lit. “one-sitting single meal”). 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 29 June 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea12.5-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA12]]  / 🌐 [[EA12.5]]
> ◄  [[ea12.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea12.6-patton]] ►
