---
sutta_code: "EA12.8"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 12.8 "
  - "Devadatta (2)"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA12]]  / 🌐 [[EA12.8]]
> ◄  [[ea12.7-patton]] 📜  [[ea13.1-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 12: The Single-Entry Path

8. The Devadatta (2)
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying on Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa near Rājagṛha. He was accompanied by an assembly of 500 great bhikkhus.
2. It was then that Devadatta had confused the Saṅgha, injured the Tathāgata’s foot, and instructed Ajātaśatru to arrest his father, who was king, and kill him. He had also killed an arhat nun. He made this statement to a great assembly, “Where is there any evil? Where does that evil come from? Who will receive the result of doing these evils? I didn’t do these evils, but I’ll receive their result?”
3. There was a group of bhikkhus who heard this said when they entered Rājagṛha to solicit alms: “That fool Devadatta said this to a great assembly, ‘Where is there any evil? Where does that evil come from? Who will receive the result of doing these evils?’” After they were done eating, that group of bhikkhus took their robes and bowls, put there sitting mats over their right shoulders, and went to visit the Bhagavān. They bowed their heads at his feet and sat to one side.
4. That group of bhikkhus then said to the Bhagavān, “The fool Devadatta said this to a great assembly: ‘How is it that doing evil brings no misfortune and making merit brings no reward? No one receives good or bad results.’”
5. The Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There is evil; there are misdeeds. Good and bad actions both have their corresponding results. If that fool Devadatta knew there were good and bad results, then he would wither and become dejected and unhappy. Blood would bubble out from his face. But that Devadatta doesn’t know about those good and bad results, so he said to a great assembly: ‘There are no good and bad results. Doing evil brings no misfortune and doing good brings no fortune.’”
6. The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:
- “A fool might decide for himself    
    That doing evil has no results,    
    But I’ve fully understood that    
    Good and evil have their results.
7. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you must stay far away from evil and not get tired of making merit. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
8. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.570c2-25]. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 30 June 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea12.8-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA12]]  / 🌐 [[EA12.8]]
> ◄  [[ea12.7-patton]] 📜  [[ea13.1-patton]] ►
