---
sutta_code: "EA12.3"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 12.3 "
  - "The Most Honored"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA12]]  / 🌐 [[EA12.3]]
> ◄  [[ea12.1-patton]] 📜  [[ea12.4-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 12: The Single-Entry Path

3. The Most Honored
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “Suppose one person appears in the world who’s the most honored, supreme, and unmatched among gods and humans, Māra and demonic gods, and ascetics and priests. Their the best field of merit that can be served and honored. Who is that one person? It’s the Tathāgata, Arhat, and Completely Awakened One. When this one person appears in the world, he’s the most honored, supreme, and unmatched among gods, humans, asuras, Māra and demonic gods, and ascetics and priests. He’s the best field of merit that can be served and honored.
3. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should always support the Tathāgata. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
4. When the bhikkhus who heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.569b19-28]. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 29 June 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea12.3-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA12]]  / 🌐 [[EA12.3]]
> ◄  [[ea12.1-patton]] 📜  [[ea12.4-patton]] ►
