---
sutta_code: "EA13.6"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 13.6 "
  - "Good Deeds"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA13]]  / 🌐 [[EA13.6]]
> ◄  [[ea13.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea13.7-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 13: Profit

6. Good Deeds
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying on Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa near Rājagṛha. He was accompanied by a great assembly of five hundred bhikkhus.
2. One day, Śakra the Lord of Gods<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] visited the Bhagavān after nightfall. He bowed his head at the Buddha’s feet and then stood to one side. Śakra then asked about the Tathāgata’s teaching in verse:
- “Could you say, could you explain in detail,    
    How to cross the flood and be uncontaminated,    
    How to cross the sea of mortality?    
    I now ask Gautama about this subject.
- I’ve observed these sentient beings here    
    And their performance of blessed deeds.    
    Of the many kinds of practitioners,    
    A gift to whom is a blessing most honored?
- To the sage who’s here now on Vulture’s Peak:    
    Please give me a teaching on this subject,    
    So I’ll know the gist of the Śākyan’s thought    
    And get an explanation on giving.”
- “The four who make merit for cessation,<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3]    
    And the four who’ve fully achieved the fruits.    
    It’s the trainees and realizers of the path    
    Who ought to be believed, their Dharma served.
- When someone lacks any desire or anger,    
    Their foolishness and contamination ends.    
    Those who completely cross the whole ocean,    
    Giving to them achieves a great reward.
- These are the classes of sentient beings    
    Who do virtuous deeds that make merit.    
    Of the many kinds of practitioners,    
    Giving to the Saṅgha obtains much merit.
- The assemblies are broad and measureless    
    Like the treasures that come from the ocean.    
    The noble assemblies are just the same,    
    For they explain the wise Dharma of light.”
- Kauśika,<a id="fnref4"></a>[^4] a good place is    
    Where one can give to the Saṅgha.    
    They’ll obtain merits inestimable,    
    For their teaching is the Supreme Victor’s.”
4. Once Śakra the Lord of Gods heard what the Buddha taught, he bowed at the Buddha’s feet, withdrew from him, and departed. When Śakra the Lord of Gods heard what the Buddha taught, he rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.575a5-28]. This _sūtra_ is parallel with [SN 11.16], SĀ 19.21-22, and T100.52. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _Śakra the Lord of Gods_. C. 釋提桓因 (EMC. ʃɪɛk-dei-ɦuan-•iĕn = G. _śak[ra]-devan[aṃ]-iṃ[dra]_ = S. _śakro-devānām-indrah_). This was a well-known abbreviated translit. for Śakra’s full title as the Lord of Gods. The _-v-_ in _deva_ was pronounced as a _-w-_. [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: _cessation_. Here, 無 appears to be a verb meaning “to become inexistent,” which I take to refer to _nirvāṇa_. I’ve translated it more literally as “cessation.” [↩︎](#fnref3)

[^4]: _Kauśika_. C. 拘翼 (EMC. kɪu-yiək). G. _koyig[a]_ > G. _kośiga_? > S. _kauśika_. The derivation of what the C. transliterates is unclear to me since it’s not typical that _-ś-_ becomes _-y-_ in G. sources, but it appears to be the case here.
    
    I’ve followed the alternate reading, which makes this last stanza the Buddha’s conclusion. The Taisho reads 瞿曇 (“Gautama”) instead, which would make it Śakra addressing the Buddha. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 25 July 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea13.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA13.6]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA13.6]], [[SN11.16]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA13]]  / 🌐 [[EA13.6]]
> ◄  [[ea13.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea13.7-patton]] ►
