---
sutta_code: "EA14.10"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 14.10 "
  - "Not Drinking Alcohol"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA14]]  / 🌐 [[EA14.10]]
> ◄  [[ea14.9-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.1-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 14: The Five Precepts

10. Not Drinking Alcohol
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There isn’t anything in this assembly greater than this one thing<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] that when cultivated and cultivated often brings the merits that are among humans, merits up in heaven, and attains the realization of _nirvāṇa_. What is that one thing? It’s not drinking alcohol.”
3. The Buddha told the bhikkhus, “If a person doesn’t drink alcohol and doesn’t think about drinking alcohol, they’ll be born intelligent, have no foolish delusions, and widely know the _sūtra_s. Their mind won’t be in disarray …
4. “Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3]
5. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
Summary Verse
- Five _sūtra_s about hell,    
    Named for unskillful practices,    
    And five on heaven and humans    
    Made know in their order.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.577a4-11]. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _There isn’t anything in this assembly greater than this one thing_. C. 於此眾中無有一法勝此法者. This final _sūtra_ of the chapter has a different translation of the opening line that makes better sense than the rest. Lit., it reads: “There isn’t a single thing greater than this thing …” This does at least confirm that it is what was intended. [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: The first statement beginning these conclusions has been lost. Since these pithy statements were unique to each text, I’ve not tried to reconstruct it. Presumably, it was along the lines of “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train in not drinking alcohol.” 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 31 July 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea14.10-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA14]]  / 🌐 [[EA14.10]]
> ◄  [[ea14.9-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.1-patton]] ►
