---
sutta_code: "EA14.7"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 14.7 "
  - "False Speech"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA14]]  / 🌐 [[EA14.7]]
> ◄  [[ea14.6-patton]] 📜  [[ea14.8-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 14: The Five Precepts

7. False Speech
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “I don’t see anything in this assembly like one thing that when cultivated and cultivated often accomplishes the actions of hell, the actions of hungry ghosts, and the actions of animals. If they were born among humans, a person will have foul breath, and people will dislike them. What is that one thing? It’s false speech.
3. The Buddha told the bhikkhus, “If a person speaks falsely, uses flattery, and instigates conflicts between one group and another, they will fall into hell, among the hungry ghosts, or among animals.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] Why is that? It’s because they spoke falsely.
4. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should always train in being honest and not speak falsely. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3]
5. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.576c9-17]. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _instigates conflicts between one group and another, they will fall into hell, among the hungry ghosts, and among animals_. C. 鬪亂是非，便墮畜生、餓鬼中。 I’ve adopted alternate readings that change this passage to “鬪亂**彼此**，便墮**地獄**、畜生、餓鬼中.” I’ve also corrected the order of the bad destinies in my translation to place animals last, which follows the pattern in this chapter. Uncorrected, the Taisho reads: “instigates conflicts, right or wrong, they will fall among animals and hungry ghosts.” [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: _Therefore, bhikkhus, one should always … Thus, bhikkhus …_. C. 是故，當至誠莫得妄語。是故，諸比丘，當作是學. I’ve adopted alternate readings that correct obvious corruptions to this standard conclusion. The Taisho omits “bhikkhus” in the first sentence, and then changes “thus” to “therefore.” Uncorrected, the Taisho reads: “Therefore, you should be honest and not speak falsely. Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.” 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 31 July 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea14.7-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA14]]  / 🌐 [[EA14.7]]
> ◄  [[ea14.6-patton]] 📜  [[ea14.8-patton]] ►
