---
sutta_code: "EA14.4"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 14.4 "
  - "Generosity"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA14]]  / 🌐 [[EA14.4]]
> ◄  [[ea14.3-patton]] 📜  [[ea14.5-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 14: The Five Precepts

4. Generosity
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “I don’t see anything in this assembly like one thing that when cultivated and cultivated often brings the merits that are among humans, the merits up in heaven, and attains the realization of _nirvāṇa_. What is that one thing? It’s generosity.”
3. The Buddha told the bhikkhus, “If a person widely practices generosity, they’ll attain the forms and powers that are perfected by many virtues.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] They’ll enjoy the food and merits that are up in heaven and among humans, which are measureless …
4. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should practice generosity and not be stingy. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
5. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.576b12-9]. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _they’ll attain the forms and powers that are perfected by many virtues_. C. 得色，得力，眾得具足. I’ve adopted an alternate that changes the end of this sentence to 眾**德**具足 (change bolded). Uncorrected, the Taisho reads: “their attainment of form, attainment of powers, and many attainments will be perfected.” Either way, this is a reference to being reborn as a wheel-turning king or a god like Śakra or Brahmā due to one’s past good deeds.
    
    It should be noted, too, that the conclusion at the end of this paragraph has been lost. This is the case for most (EĀ 14.4-6 and 8-10) of the _sūtra_s in this chapter. It’s not possible to reconstruct these conclusions precisely, but they are statements about the consequences of doing the good or bad action in question (cf. EĀ 14.1-3 and 7). 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 27 July 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea14.4-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA14]]  / 🌐 [[EA14.4]]
> ◄  [[ea14.3-patton]] 📜  [[ea14.5-patton]] ►
