---
sutta_code: "EA15.6"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 15.6 "
  - "Two Signs of a Fool"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.6]]
> ◄  [[ea15.5-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.8-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 15: Existence and Inexistence

6. Two Signs of a Fool
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “A fool has these two signs and appearances. What are the two? Here, a fool who is incapable of accomplishing something still undertakes it, or they grow tired and abandon something they’re close to accomplishing. These, bhikkhus, are said to be two signs and appearances of a fool.
3. “Furthermore, bhikkhus, a wise person has two signs and appearances. What are the two? Here, a wise person doesn’t undertake something that they can’t accomplish, and they don’t abandon something that they’re close to accomplishing …
4. “Therefore, bhikkhus, these two signs and appearances of a fool should be abandoned, and you should remember and cultivate these two signs and appearances of a wise person. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
5. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.577c3-12]. This _sūtra_ is of the same type as [AN 2.134-137], but it presents a different version of the two signs of a fool and a wise person. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 30 August 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea15.6-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.6]]
> ◄  [[ea15.5-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.8-patton]] ►
