---
sutta_code: "EA15.3"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 15.3 "
  - "Two Kinds of Gifts"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.3]]
> ◄  [[ea15.2-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.4-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 15: Existence and Inexistence

3. Two Kinds of Gifts
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There are two kinds of gifts. What are the two? They are Dharma gifts and material gifts.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] bhikkhus, the best of gifts doesn’t go beyond Dharma gifts.
3. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should always train in making Dharma gifts. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
4. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.577b14-9]. This _sūtra_ is parallel to [AN 2.141]. The next two also appear to be generally parallel to AN 2.141-150. This would appear to be another case of the curators of AN expanding a couple older _sūtra_s into a full chapter of ten. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _material gifts_. C. 財施. The Pali parallel has _āmisadāna_. _Āmisa_ generally means physical things. Sometimes it means specifically food or bodily concerns, but it can also been worldly possessions and wealth. It seems likely the same underlying term was translated here, but it was interpreted as possessions (presumably those typical of alms giving). 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 30 August 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea15.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA15.3]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA15.3]], [[AN2.141]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.3]]
> ◄  [[ea15.2-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.4-patton]] ►
