---
sutta_code: "EA15.10"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 15.10 "
  - "Right View"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.10]]
> ◄  [[ea15.8-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.1-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 15: Existence and Inexistence

10. Right View
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There are two causes and two conditions that produce right view. What are the two? Accepting the Dharma teaching and inner thought that’s calming and contemplative.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] bhikkhus, these are two causes and two conditions that produce right view. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
3. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
Summary Verse
- [1-2] Two views and [3-5] two gifts,    
    [6] Two signs of a fool,    
    [7-9] Honoring the Dharma and the Tathāgata’s shrine,    
    And the last is [10] right view.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.578a4-11]. Thus _sūtra_ is parallel with [AN 2.126], and it shares the same basic template that we find in [AN 2.118-129]. There is also a parallel implied by the two causes and conditions of right view found in the Dharmaguptaka [DĀ 9 Gathered Saṅgha Sūtra](../../dirgha/DA_9.html#p19) (S. _saṅgīti_), which was apparently identical to the Theravāda version in content. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _calm and contemplative_. C. 止、觀. I.e., S. _śamatha_ and _vipāśyana_. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 30 August 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea15.10-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA15.10]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA15.10]], [[AN2.126]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.10]]
> ◄  [[ea15.8-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.1-patton]] ►
