---
sutta_code: "EA15.5"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 15.5 "
  - "Two Kinds of Favors"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.5]]
> ◄  [[ea15.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.6-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 15: Existence and Inexistence

5. Two Kinds of Favors
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There are these two favors. What are the two? They are Dharma favors and material favors. The best of favors doesn’t go beyond Dharma favors.
3. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should cultivate Dharma favors. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
4. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.577b26-c2]. This _sūtra_ appears to have had a parallel in another Indic _Ekottarika Āgama_ preserved only in a few fragments. Yusen Okubo documented the fragment of a _sūtra_ on “two favors” (S. _dve bhakti_) in his paper _Ekottara-āgama Fragments in the Gilgit Manuscript_ (p. 27), which was part of a chapter on gifts parallel with [AN 2.141-150]. On the other hand, it may be a parallel of AN 2.149 where P. _anuggaha_ can also be interpreted as “favors, assistance.” 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 30 August 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea15.5-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.5]]
> ◄  [[ea15.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.6-patton]] ►
