---
sutta_code: "EA15.8"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 15.8 "
  - "Honoring the Dharma"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.8]]
> ◄  [[ea15.6-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.10-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 15: Existence and Inexistence

8. Honoring the Dharma
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There are two things that honor the Dharma jewel as well as the shrines of the Tathāgata and gods when one contemplates and focuses on them single-mindedly. What are the two things? Possessing the powers and kinds of fearlessness.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] bhikkhus, these are two things that honor the Dharma jewel and the shrines of the Tathāgata and gods when one contemplates and focuses on them single-mindedly. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
3. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.577c19-25]. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _possessing powers and kinds of fearlessness_. C. 有力、有無畏. The C. doesn’t explicitly make these two things plural, but I take them to refer to the ten powers and four kinds of fearlessness, which are commonly ascribed to _buddha_s rather than disciples. It may be a reference to lesser rubrics like the five powers and confidence in teaching. If the former was the case, then this _sūtra_ would be encouraging a _bodhisattva_ practice. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 30 August 2023


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea15.8-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA15]]  / 🌐 [[EA15.8]]
> ◄  [[ea15.6-patton]] 📜  [[ea15.10-patton]] ►
