---
sutta_code: "EA16.9"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 16.9 "
  - "The Brahmin"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.9]]
> ◄  [[ea16.7-patton]] 📜  [[ea17.1-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 16: The Fire Extinguished

9. The Brahmin
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that Venerable Aniruddha was in the homeland near Kuśinagara. At the time, Śakra, Brahmā, the four god kings with five hundred lesser gods, and the twenty-eight great _yakṣa_ kings<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] paid a visit to Venerable Aniruddha. When they arrived, they bowed their heads at his feet and stood to one side. They then praised Aniruddha in verse:
- “Homage to the best of humans,    
    Who is honored by the host of humans!    
    Now, we don’t know    
    What meditation is the basis for this?”
3. Then, there was a brahmin named *Javata<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3] who was a disciple of Brahmāyu. He also visited Venerable Aniruddha, bowing his head at his feet and sitting to one side. That brahmin then asked Aniruddha, “I was once born in a king’s palace, but I’ve never smelled a natural fragrance like this. What sort of being has been here? Was it a god, a _nāga_, a _yakṣa_, a human, or a non-human?”
4. Aniruddha then told the brahmin, “It was Śakra, Brahmā, the four god kings with five hundred lesser gods, and the twenty-eight _yakṣa_ kings who came to visit me. They bowed their heads at my feet and stood to one side. They also praised me with this verse:
- “‘Homage to the best of humans,    
    Who is honored by the host of humans!    
    Now, we don’t know    
    What meditation is the basis for this?’”
5. The brahmin asked, “But why don’t I see their bodies? Where are Śakra, Brahmā, and the four god kings now?”
Aniruddha replied, “You don’t have the heavenly eye, so you don’t see Śakra, Brahmā, the four god kings with five hundred lesser gods, or the twenty-eight _yakṣa_ kings.”
6. The brahmin asked, “So, if I were to obtain the heavenly eye, I would see Śakra, Brahmā, the four god kings with five hundred lesser gods, and the twenty-eight _yakṣa_ kings?”
Aniruddha replied, “If you were to obtain the heavenly eye, you would see Śakra, Brahmā, the four god kings with five hundred lesser gods, and the twenty-eight _yakṣa_ kings. But, brahmin, this heavenly eye is an extraordinary ability. There is a Brahmā King named Thousand Eyes. He looks at this thousand world cosmos like a man who has good eyesight examines a jeweled crown in his own hands. This Brahmā is likewise as he looks at this thousand world cosmos without obstruction. Even so, this Brahmā doesn’t see the clothes that he is wearing.”<a id="fnref4"></a>[^4]
7. The brahmin asked, “Why doesn’t that Brahmā Thousand Eyes see the clothes that adorns his own body?”
Aniruddha said, “That god doesn’t see the clothes that adorns his own body because he lacks the unsurpassed wisdom eye.”
8. The brahmin asked, “If I were to obtain this unsurpassed wisdom eye, would I see the clothes that adorns this body?”
Aniruddha said, “If someone were to obtain the unsurpassed wisdom eye, then they could see the clothes that adorns their own body.”
9. The brahmin asked, “Please, Venerable, explain to me the subtle Dharma so that I will attain this unsurpassed wisdom eye.”
10. Aniruddha asked, “Do you have the precept?”
The brahmin asked, “What do you call the precept?”
Aniruddha said, “Not doing any evil and not violating the Dharma.”
11. The brahmin said, “If that is the precept, I could accept and observe it.”
12. Aniruddha said, “Now, brahmin, you should observe this precept without losing a bit of it. You must also leave behind the bondage of pride. Don’t form defiling notions about the self or oneself.”<a id="fnref5"></a>[^5]
13. The brahmin again questioned Aniruddha, “What is the self, and what is myself? What is the bondage of pride?”
Aniruddha said, “Self is the spirit consciousness, and oneself is the endowment of a physical body. Self and oneself are born when awareness arises. This is called the bondage of pride. Therefore, brahmin, you should pursue the methods that remove these bonds. Thus, brahmin, you should train yourself.”
14. The brahmin then rose from his seat, bowed at Aniruddha’s feet, circled him three times, and departed. Before he had reached where he was going, he considered this goal while he was on the road. His dust and defilement were ended, and his Dharma eye was clarified.
15. There was then a god who had once been this brahmin’s friend. This god knew that the brahmin had attained the end of dust and defilement in his mind and had clarified his Dharma eye. The god then returned to visit Venerable Aniruddha, bowed his head at Aniruddha’s feet, and stood to one side. The god then praised Aniruddha with verse:
- “Before that brahmin was home,    
    He found the path while on the road.    
    With defilements gone and Dharma eye clear,    
    He has no doubts or uncertainties.”
16. Venerable Aniruddha then told that god in verse:
- “I examined his mind earlier.    
    Being inbetween, he should’ve been on the path.    
    That man had heard the Dharma    
    That was taught by the Buddha Kāśyapa.”
17. Venerable Aniruddha then went touring among the people when he left that place. He gradually made his way to Śrāvastī. He visited the Bhagavān, bowed his head at the Buddha’s feet, and stood to one side. The Bhagavān gave Aniruddha a full teaching of the Dharma. After accepting the Buddha’s teaching, Aniruddha then rose from his seat, bowed his head at the Buddha’s feet, and then withdrew and departed.
18. The Bhagavān told the bhikkhus, “The monk Aniruddha is the disciple among those who have heard my voice who is best at obtaining the heavenly eye.”
19. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.580c9-1b14]. I’m not aware of any direct parallels for this _sūtra_. It’s one of a group of _sūtra_s in EĀ that provide background stories for when disciples were declared by the Buddha to be the best at a given skill or attribute. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _Śakra, Brahmā, the four god kings, five hundred lesser gods, and the twenty-eight great _yakṣa_ kings_. C. 釋、梵、四天王及五百天人，并二十八大鬼神王. Except for Brahmā, these are all divinities who lived on Mount Sumeru in Buddhist mythology. Śakra (a.k.a. Indra) ruled the Trayastriṃśa Heaven at the peak of Sumeru, and the four god kings acted as his vassals, each ruling a city a little lower on each side of the mountain. The five hundred other gods were likely the inhabitants of these cities. The twenty-eight _yakṣa_ kings were the leaders of the _yakṣa_ armies that defending the gods against the _asura_s. They lived on the lower parts of Mount Sumeru, which was quite gigantic at 84,000 _yojana_s in height. [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: _*Javata_. C. 闍拔吒 (EMC. ʒɪă-bʌt-ṭă = G. _jabata_?). This is a guess based on the transliteration. There are a couple possible S. words that it might be related to: One is _javādi_, a kind of perfume. Another is the verb _javate_, which can mean “to be quick, urge, incite, inspire, hurry.” The perfume connection seems possible given the character’s detecting the presumably pleasant smell of the gods in the story, but he also inspires the discourse by Aniruddha.
    
    In Pali sources, Brahmāyu’s disciple Uttara was dispatched to investigate whether the Buddha possessed the thirty-two signs of a great man. [↩︎](#fnref3)

[^4]: _the clothes that he is wearing_. C. 身所著衣服. This curious expression is perhaps the result of a phonetic confusion of S. _vastra_ and _vartma_ or _vṛtta_, which are nearly homophones in P. (_vattha_ and _vaṭṭa_). The former means “clothes,” while the latter mean “a course” or a “cycle,” which Buddhists used metaphorically for the cycle of rebirth. In P. sources such as MN 49, Brahmā is said to be ignorant of other realms of rebirth, which here seems to have changed somehow to his own clothes. Beyond this explanation, I can only surmise that there may have been some esoteric metaphor that is left unexplained. [↩︎](#fnref4)

[^5]: _the self or oneself_. C. 吾、我. Both of these words in C. serve as first person pronouns, and ordinarily I would read them as a single word. Aniruddha defines them below as referring to a spiritual soul (神識, lit. “spirit consciousness”) and the physical incarnation of a person (形體之具, lit. “endowment of the bodily form”). As such, they apparently stood for a permanent and an impermanent self. Aniruddha is likely speaking to the brahmin about the Brahmanical belief in an eternal soul and tells him that it is not different than the body, arising with awareness. He doesn’t say that it isn’t real, but implies that it is at best as impermanent as one’s body. I’ve tried to approximate the difference by translating the two words as “self” and as a reflexive pronoun. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 25 November 2024


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea16.9-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.9]]
> ◄  [[ea16.7-patton]] 📜  [[ea17.1-patton]] ►
