---
sutta_code: "EA16.6"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 16.6 "
  - "Two Things"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.6]]
> ◄  [[ea16.5-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.7-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 16: The Fire Extinguished

6. Two Things
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “I will teach all of you two things about the subtle Dharma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, and that has the content and expression that fully cultivates the way of the religious life. Listen closely! Listen closely, and consider it well. I will give you a full explanation of this.”
The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, Bhagavān.” The bhikkhus then accepted the Buddha’s teaching.
3. The Bhagavān said, “What are the two things? They are wrong view and right view, wrong control and right control, wrong speech and right speech, wrong action and right action, wrong livelihood and right livelihood, wrong method and right method, wrong mindfulness and right mindfulness, and wrong _samādhi_ and right _samādhi_.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] These, bhikkhus, are called the two things. Now, I’ve given you an explanation of these two things as a Tāthagata should, and now I am finished. Remember, contemplate, and recite it well,<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3] and don’t be lazy about it. If this isn’t done now, there’ll be no comparison for your regret later.”
4. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.580b2-14]. I’m not aware of any direct parallels for this _sūtra_. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _right control … right method._ C. 正治⋯正方便, P. _sammā saṅkappa … sammā vāyāma_. These two items, which are typically translated as “right intention” or “thought” and “right effort,” seem to have been difficult words to translate to Chinese. This is evidenced by the inconsistency between translations compared to the other six items in the eightfold path. It might also indicate that the words in the Indic texts varied, but I have not seen direct evidence of this. [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: _remember, contemplate, and recite it well._ C. 善念、觀、誦. The next _sūtra_, EĀ 16.7, has the same conclusion, but there the phrase reads “remember and recite (from memory) well” (善念、諷誦). The passage here may well be corrupt and should be amended, but I have left it as-is for the time being. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 15 November 2024


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea16.6-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.6]]
> ◄  [[ea16.5-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.7-patton]] ►
