---
sutta_code: "EA16.3"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 16.3 "
  - "The Crow"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.3]]
> ◄  [[ea16.1-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.5-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 16: The Fire Extinguished

3. The Crow
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “Now, I will teach you the analogy of the crow, and I’ll teach you the analogy of the pig. Consider well my explanation.”
They replied, “Yes, Bhagavān.” The bhikkhus then accepted the Buddha’s teaching.
3. The Bhagavān told them, “What’s the analogy of a person who’s like a crow? Take the example of a person who lives in a peaceful place. They are always making a habit of lustful desires and doing evil deeds. Sometime later, they are ashamed, and then they reform themselves. They go to someone for a teaching and spend time serving that teacher. As a result of this, religious practitioners who see this person might slander them: ‘This person made a habit of desire and they did evil deeds.’ After they did those evil deeds, they went to someone and repented because they felt ashamed.
4. “That person is like a crow that’s often troubled by hunger and eats impure things, but it’s quick to clean its beak.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] Afraid that there are more crows, those who see it say, ‘This crow eats impure things!’ This is like that person who lives in a peaceful place and made a habit of lustful desires. They did unskillful deeds, but later they were ashamed and reformed themselves. They went someone to be taught, and they spend time serving that teacher. As a result of this, religious practitioners who see this person might slander them: ‘This person made a habit of desire, and they did evil deeds.’ This is called the analogy of a person who’s like a crow.
5. “What’s the analogy of a person who’s like a pig? Suppose a person lives in a peaceful place. They make a habit of lust desires for a long time, and they do evil deeds. But they aren’t ashamed, and they don’t reform themselves. They go to someone and praise themselves. They proudly saying of themselves, ‘I can obtain and enjoy the five desires. These other people aren’t able to obtain those five desires.’ Having done evil deeds, they aren’t ashamed.
6. “That person is like a pig that often eats impure things and lays in impurity. Then, it leaps at the other pigs. This person is like that. They made a habit of lustful desires and did evil deeds, but they weren’t ashamed of it and didn’t reform themselves. They went to someone and praised themselves, proudly saying of themselves, ‘I can obtain the five desires and enjoy myself. These people aren’t able to obtain those five desires.’ This is said to be a person who’s like a pig.
7. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should abandon [being like a pig] and stay away from it. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
8. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.579a24-b20]. I’ve not found a parallel for this _sūtra_. [AN 10.77] likens a bad monk to a crow, whereas here the crow is employed as a positive analogy that’s contrasted with the pig. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _impure things_. C. 不淨. Lit. “impure” or “unclean.” In this context, I would take it mean something considered inedible by people like carrion, dung, or refuse. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 13 November 2024


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea16.3-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.3]]
> ◄  [[ea16.1-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.5-patton]] ►
