---
sutta_code: "EA16.7"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 16.7 "
  - "The Candle"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.7]]
> ◄  [[ea16.6-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.9-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 16: The Fire Extinguished

7. The Candle
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān told the bhikkhus, “Now, I will teach you the principle of candlelight, and I’ll teach you the deeds of the path along which that candle leads. Listen closely! Listen closely, and consider it well.”
The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, Bhagavān.” [The bhikkhus then accepted the Buddha’s teaching.]
3. The Bhagavān then told the bhikkhus, “What is it that’s called candlelight? That refers to ending lust, anger, and delusion. What is it that’s called the deeds of the path along which that candle leads? They are right view, right control, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right method, right mindfulness, and right _samādhi_. These are called the deeds of the path along which that candle leads. I’ve taught the bhikkhus about the candlelight and also taught them about the deeds of the path along which that candle leads as a Tathāgata should. Now, I am finished. Remember and recite it well, and don’t be lazy about it. If this isn’t done now, there’ll be no comparison for your regret later.”
4. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.580b15-25]. I’m not aware of any direct parallels for this _sūtra_. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 15 November 2024


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea16.7-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.7]]
> ◄  [[ea16.6-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.9-patton]] ►
