---
sutta_code: "EA16.5"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 16.5 "
  - "Unskillful"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.5]]
> ◄  [[ea16.3-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.6-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 16: The Fire Extinguished

5. Unskillful
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “Now, I will explain skillful and unskillful conduct. Listen closely! Listen closely, and consider it well.”
The bhikkhus replied, “Yes, Bhagavān.” [The bhikkhus then accepted the teaching from the Buddha.]
3. The Buddha told them, “What is called unskillful [conduct], and what is called skillful [conduct]? Killing beings is unskillful, and not killing is skillful. Taking what’s not given is unskillful, and taking what’s given is skillful. Debauchery is unskillful, and celibacy is skillful. False speech is unskillful, and not speaking falsely is skillful. Flattery is unskillful, and unflattering speech is skillful. Duplicity is unskillful, and not being duplicitous is skillful. Creating conflict with this group and another is unskillful, and not creating conflict with this group and another is skillful. Desiring others is unskillful, and not desiring others is skillful.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2] Becoming angry is unskillful, and not becoming angry is skillful. Wrong views are unskillful, and right views are skillful.”
4. “Thus, bhikkhus, someone who has practiced these evils falls to an animal birth, to the hungry ghosts, or into hell. Someone who practices these virtues is born among humans, up in heaven, or among the _asura_s of a good destiny. Therefore, bhikkhus, you must stay away from evil conduct and cultivate good conduct. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
5. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.580a16-b1]. I’m not aware of any direct parallels for this _sūtra_, but the content is a common sentiment found in many early Buddhist sources. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _desiring others_. C. 貪他. It’s not clear to me whether “others” (他) is intended to refer to other people or other people’s possessions. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 15 November 2024


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea16.5-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA16]]  / 🌐 [[EA16.5]]
> ◄  [[ea16.3-patton]] 📜  [[ea16.6-patton]] ►
