---
sutta_code: "EA17.1"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 17.1 "
  - "Rāhula"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA17]]  / 🌐 [[EA17.1]]
> ◄  [[ea16.9-patton]] 📜  [[ea17.3-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 17: Breathing

1. Rāhula
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. When he arrived there, the Bhagavān put on his robe, took his bowl, and led Rāhula to the city of Śrāvastī to solicit alms. The Bhagavān then turned to his right and said to Rāhula, “You should contemplate form as impermanent now.”
Rāhula replied, “Yes, Bhagavān. Form is impermanent.”
3. The Bhagavān told him, “Rāhula, feeling, conception, volition, and awareness are all impermanent.”
Rāhula replied, “Yes, Bhagavān. Feeling, conception, volition, and awareness are all impermanent.”
4. Venerable Rāhula then had this thought, “What’s the reason for this? We’re headed to the city for alms, and we’re on the road. Why has the Bhagavān given me this personal instruction? I ought to turn back now and not solicit alms in the city.”
5. Then, upon arriving at the Jeta’s Grove monastery from the road, Venerable Rāhula put away his robe and bowl, went to a spot under a tree, and sat there cross-legged with the proper posture and mindfulness. He focused his whole mind on the thought “form is impermanent” and the thought “feeling, conception, volition, and awareness are impermanent.”<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2]
6. At that point, the Bhagavān went for a walk at the Jeta’s Grove monastery after he had solicited food in Śrāvastī and eaten.<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3] Eventually, he reached the place where Rāhula was. Having arrived there, he addressed Rāhula, “You should cultivate the teaching on breathing. By cultivating this teaching, whatever notions of grief that you have will be eliminated. You should also cultivate the notions of the foul discharges and impurities, and then whatever cravings you have will be entirely eliminated. Now, Rāhula, you should cultivate the thought of kindness. Having cultivated the thought of kindness, whatever hate you have will be eliminated. Now, Rāhula, you should cultivate the thought of compassion. Having cultivated the thought of compassion, whatever harmful thoughts you have will all be eliminated. Now, Rāhula, you should cultivate the thought of joy. Having cultivated the thought of joy, whatever jealous thoughts you have will be eliminated. Now, Rāhula, you should cultivate the thought of equanimity. Having cultivated the thought of equanimity, whatever pride you have will be entirely eliminated.”
7. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses to Rāhula:
- “Don’t produce ideas of attachment so much,    
    And you will naturally follow the Dharma.    
    In this way, the wise man’s fame    
    Will then spread far and wide.
- He gives people the torch of insight    
    That destroys the vast darkness.    
    Gods and _nāga_s honor and pay him respect;    
    They accept him as their venerable teacher.”
8. The monk Rāhula then replied to the Bhagavān with this verse:
- “Not becoming attached to notions,    
    I will always follow the Dharma.    
    This indeed is one who is wise;    
    They’re accepted as a teacher.”
9. After giving him this instruction, the Bhagavān then got up and returned to his quiet abode.<a id="fnref4"></a>[^4]
10. Venerable Rāhula then had this thought, “Now, how does cultivating breathing eliminate one’s grief and notions?” Rāhula then rose from his seat and went to the Bhagavān. Having arrived there, he bowed his head at the Bhagavān’s feet and sat to one side. A moment after he withdrew to sit, he said to the Bhagavān, “How does cultivating breathing eliminate one’s grief and notions? How does it obtain a great reward and gain the taste of ambrosia?”
11. The Bhagavān told Rāhula, “Excellent, Rāhula! Excellent! You were able to come before the Tathāgata and roar the lion’s roar by asking about this topic. ‘How does cultivating breathing eliminate one’s grief and notions? How does it obtain a great reward and gain the taste of ambrosia?’ Now Rāhula, listen closely! Listen closely and consider it well. I will fully discern it for you.”
He replied, “Yes, Bhagavān.” Venerable Rāhula then accepted the Bhagavān’s teaching.
12. The Bhagavān told him, “Here, Rāhula, suppose there is a monk who enjoys being in a quiet and secluded place away from people. He sits cross-legged with the proper posture and mindfulness. Without any other thoughts, he fixes his mind on the tip of his nose. When his exhalation is long, he knows his breath is long. When his inhalation is long, he also knows that his breath is long. When his exhalation is short, he knows his breath is short. When his inhalation is short, he also knows that his breath is short. When his exhalation is cool, he knows his breath is cool. When his inhalation is cool, he also knows his breath is cool. When his exhalation is warm, he knows that his breath is warm. When his inhalation is warm, he also knows that his breath is warm. He fully observes his body as he inhales and exhales, being aware of it all. When there is breathing, he knows that he’s breathing. When there’s no breathing, he also knows that he isn’t breathing. If his breath follows the thought to exhale, he knows that it followed the thought to exhale. If his breath follows the thought to inhale, he also knows that it followed the thought to inhale. Rāhula, one who can cultivate their breathing in this way will have no grief or disturbing notions. They will obtain a great reward and gain the taste of ambrosia.”<a id="fnref5"></a>[^5]
13. After the Bhagavān had finished giving him this subtle teaching, Rāhula rose from his seat, bowed at the Buddha’s feet, circled him three times, and then departed. Arriving in Andha Park, he went to a spot under a tree and sat cross-legged with the proper posture and mindfulness. Without any other thoughts, he fixed his mind on the tip of his nose. When his exhalation was long, he knew his breath was long. When his inhalation was long, he also knew that his breath was long. When his exhalation was short, he knew that his breath was short. When his inhalation was short, he also knew that his breath was short. When his exhalation was cool, he knew his breath was cool. When his inhalation was cool, he also knew his breath was cool. When his exhalation was warm, he knew that his breath was warm. When his inhalation was warm, he also knew that his breath was warm. He fully observed his body as he inhaled and exhaled, being aware of it all. When there was breathing, he knew that he was breathing. When there was no breathing, he also knew that he wasn’t breathing. If his breath followed the thought to exhale, he knew that it followed the thought to exhale. If his breath followed the thought to inhale, he also knew that it followed the thought to inhale.
14. When Rāhula contemplated thoughts of desire in this way, he became liberated and had no more of the myriad bad [and unskillful things]. While he noticed and examined things, he was mindful and maintained his joy and happiness, and he dwelled in the first meditation. Once noticing and examining things had subsided, he had an inner joy and a focused, unified mind. Without noticing or examining things, his _samādhi_ was mindful and joyous as he dwelled in the second meditation. With no more joyous thoughts, he guarded himself and experienced the personal happiness that’s always sought by noble people and that’s equanimous, joyous, and mindful. He then dwelled in the third meditation. Once his pain and pleasure had ceased, he had no more grief. Without pain or pleasure, his equinimous mindfulness was pure, and he dwelled in the fourth meditation.
15. “Because of this _samādhi_, his mind was pure and without defilement, and his body was flexible. He knew where he came from and remembered what he had done in the past. He was aware of the events of his past lives for countless eons. He was aware of one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, and numerous hundreds of thousands of lives. He recalled eons of formation and eons of destruction, countless eons of formation and countless eons of destruction in the millions, billions, and inestimable numbers. “I was once born there with such a given name and such a surname. I ate foods like these, felt pleasures and pains like these, and my life had a certain length. I died there and was born here, and then I died here and was born there.”
16. Because of this _samādhi_, his mind was pure, without defilement, and without any fetters. He also knew the thoughts produced by sentient beings. Moreover, he observed the kinds of sentient beings there were with the heavenly eye that was pure and without defilement. He truly knew as they were being born and dying their good and bad forms, their good and bad destinations, and whether their actions and works were beautiful or ugly. The physical, mental, and verbal conduct of some sentient beings was bad. They slandered noble people, practiced wrong views, and performed actions of wrong view. When their bodies broke up and their lives ended, they entered hell. The physical, mental, and verbal conduct of some sentient beings was good. They didn’t slander noble people, always practiced right views, and performed actions of right view. When their bodies broke up and their lives ended, they were born in good places up in heaven. This is called the heavenly eye that’s pure and without defilement observing the kinds of sentient beings that there are. It truly knows as they are being born and dying their good and bad forms, their good and bad destinations, and whether their actions and works are beautiful or ugly.
17. Moreover, he had a generous intent and achieved the thought of ending the contaminants. He truly knew “This is suffering” when he examined it. He truly knew the formation of suffering, the end of suffering, and the escape from suffering when he examined them. Because he performed these contemplations, his mind was liberated from the contaminant of desire, and his mind was liberated from the contaminants of existence and ignorance. Once he was liberated, he then had knowledge that he was liberated: “Birth and death have been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished.” He truly knew that he would not be subject to another existence. At that point, Venerable Rāhula became an _arhat_.
18. After Venerable Rāhula became an _arhat_, he rose from his seat, arranged his robes, and went to the Bhagavān. He bowed his head at the Buddha’s feet and then stood to one side. He said to the Bhagavān, “I have found what I was seeking. My contaminants have been eliminated.”
19. The Bhagavan then addressed the bhikkhus, “Of those who’ve become _arhat_s, none are the equal of Rāhula. They declare the end of contamination, and so has the monk Rāhula. They declare that they keep the precepts, and so does the monk Rāhula. Why is that? The Tathāgatas and Completely Awakened Ones of the past also had this monk Rāhula. This monk Rāhula also wanted to be called the Buddha’s son. Being born as kin to a _buddha_ is the highest state.”
20. The Bhagavān then told the bhikkhus, “Among my disciples, the monk Rāhula is the best at keeping the precepts.”
21. The Bhagavān then spoke this verse:
- “Possessing the way of precepts    
    One also accomplishes the faculties.    
    Gradually they will obtain    
    The end to all bondage.”
22. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.581c1-2c19]. This _sūtra_ is parallel with [MN 62]. See the notes below for comparisons of these two versions of this _sūtra_. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: This introduction is essentially the same as what we find in MN 62, but there Rāhula doesn’t simply repeat the Buddha’s instructions. The most significant difference is that in MN 62, the Buddha tells Rāhula that the five aggregates are not self rather than impermanent. [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: At this point, the story in MN 62 diverges from this version. There, it’s Sāriputta who happens upon Rāhula and advises him to practice the mindfulness of breathing. Rāhula then goes to the Buddha later in the day and asks for instruction on how to cultivate that practice. At that point, the Buddha teaches him a series of contemplations like the ones we find here in EĀ 17.1, with the addition of contemplations of five elements of the body (earth, water, fire, air, and space). After that, another set of contemplations are taught designed to develop equinimity.
    
    Here, the Buddha gives Rāhula a program of contemplation subjects designed to counteract a set of unskillful mental qualities: Mindfulness of breathing to eliminate grief, the impurities to eliminate cravings, kindness to eliminate hate, compassion to eliminate harmful thoughts, joy to eliminate jealousy, and equanimity to eliminate pride. In MN 62, these contemplations are placed in a more-or-less reverse order: kindness, compassion, joy, equanimity, impurity, impermanence, and mindfulness of breathing. [↩︎](#fnref3)

[^4]: This exchange of verses is not found in MN 62; however, it would make sense for a teacher to give a student a verse to memorize before leaving him to practice alone during the early oral tradition period of Buddhism. The verse would serve as a mnemonic key to recall the oral teaching that was received. [↩︎](#fnref4)

[^5]: This version of the mindfulness of breathing is somewhat different in its details than the better known version that’s found in Theravāda and Sarvāstivāda sources. As such, it shows that there were alternative explanations of this particular practice. Here, the entire program of mindfulness is focused on observing the breath, the body, and finally when breathing is intentional (as opposed to autonomic or involuntary).
    
    In the more well-known version, other contemplations and references to the four meditations are collected together that have little to do with breathing. It seems to be a similar situation as we find with the four abodes of mindfulness, where tangential or unrelated practices were added to the mindfulness of body.
    
    MN 62 ends with this instruction given to Rāhula by the Buddha. Here in EĀ 17.1, Rāhula goes on to practice this mindfulness of breathing and the four meditations. He then attains the three knowledges of past lives, the rebirth of sentient beings, and the ending of the contaminants. He then becomes an _arhat_. The Buddha then declares to the bhikkhus that Rāhula is the best disciple at keeping precepts. This indicates that this _sūtra_ belonged to a group of texts that provide back stories for disciples being called the best at certain virtues or skills.
    
    The omission of Rāhula’s awakening in MN 62 might be explained by the fact that an alternative story about Rāhula becoming an _arhat_ is found in [MN 147]. MN 147 in turn is paralleled by the Sarvāstivāda version found at [SĀ 2.57 (200)](../../samyukta/02/SA2_57.html). EĀ 17.1 and MN 62, on the other hand, have no parallel in the extant Sarvāstivāda canon.
    
    Could it be that two contradictory stories about Rāhula’s awakening from EĀ and SĀ found their way into MN, and the Theravāda tradition resolved it by choosing MN 147 as their official version? It certainly would explain the abrupt end to MN 62. The fact that this version involves awakening through the four meditations (MN 147 does not) adds a potential controversy over whether Rāhula was an _arhat_ liberated by wisdom or liberated in both ways. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 25 February 2025


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea17.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA17.1]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN54.1]], [[MN118]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PJ3]], [[EA17.1]], [[MN62]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA17]]  / 🌐 [[EA17.1]]
> ◄  [[ea16.9-patton]] 📜  [[ea17.3-patton]] ►
