---
sutta_code: "EA17.4"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 17.4 "
  - "Two Things"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA17]]  / 🌐 [[EA17.4]]
> ◄  [[ea17.3-patton]] 📜  [[ea17.5-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 17: Breathing

4. Two Things
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There are two things in the world that are very afflicting. What are the two things? They are creating the myriad roots of evil that produce resentments and not doing good actions that are the roots of virtue. These, bhikkhus, are two things that are very afflicting.
3. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should recognize these afflicting things, and you should recognize things that aren’t afflicting. You should be mindful of afflicting things and eliminate them, and you should be mindful of things that aren’t afflicting and cultivate them. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
4. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.583a10-8]. It’s parallel with [AN 2.3]. The explanation is less verbose here but the same point is made. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 25 February 2025


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea17.4-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA17]]  / 🌐 [[EA17.4]]
> ◄  [[ea17.3-patton]] 📜  [[ea17.5-patton]] ►
