---
sutta_code: "EA17.5"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 17.5 "
  - "Bitter Fruit"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA17]]  / 🌐 [[EA17.5]]
> ◄  [[ea17.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea17.6-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 17: Breathing

5. Nothing Respectable
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There’s nothing respectable about any of the thoughts, destinations, and other actions of sentient beings with wrong views. They don’t delight the world’s people. Why is that? It’s because their wrong views aren’t good.
3. “It’s just as ‘seeds of bitter fruit’ refer to the bitter fruit, bitter sprouts, Witlowgrass seed, _*pitavandi_ seed, and other bitter seeds. When these seeds are planted in good soil, they sprout afterward and are just as bitter as before. Why is that? It’s because those seeds are the source of the bitterness.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2]
4. “These sentient beings with wrong views are likewise. There’s nothing respectable about the physical, verbal, and mental actions that they do, their destinations, their thoughts, or their evil actions. They don’t delight the world’s people. Why is that? It’s because their wrong views are bad and not good.
5. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should eliminate wrong views and cultivate right views. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
6. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.583a19-b2]. It’s parallels are [AN 1.314] and [SF 206]. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: _Witlowgrass seed_. C. 葶藶子. This is a C. name for a type of grass commonly called yellow or draba Witlowgrass. What the original Indian text was referencing is not clear to me.
    
    _*pitavandi_. C. 畢地槃持 (EMC. piĕt-dii-buan-ḍɪei = Pr. _pidipande_?). There is no information that I can find for this translit., and it doesn’t resemble the examples that occur in the P. and S. parallels. It presumably is something edible that tastes bad, but exactly what it was has fallen into obscurity. The closest Indic word I can find is G. _pidavaṃnidaga_ (S. _pītavarṇitaka_), which would simply mean “something yellow-colored.” I have reproduced the translit. as best as possible for the time being.
    
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 25 February 2025


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea17.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA17.5]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA17.5]], [[AN10.104]], [[AN1.314]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA17]]  / 🌐 [[EA17.5]]
> ◄  [[ea17.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea17.6-patton]] ►
