---
sutta_code: "EA17.6"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 17.6 "
  - "Sweet Fruit"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA17]]  / 🌐 [[EA17.6]]
> ◄  [[ea17.5-patton]] 📜  [[ea19.1-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 17: Breathing

6. Respectable
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “All the thoughts, destinations, and other actions of sentient beings with right views are entirely respectable. Worldly people are delighted by them. Why is that? Because their right views are wonderful.
3. “It’s like sweet fruits. Suppose someone cultivates good soil and then plants sugarcane, mangos, or any other sweet fruit. Afterward, the seeds grow. All [their produce] is sweet tasting, and people desire it. Why is that? It’s because those fruit seeds are the source of the sweetness.
4. “These sentient beings with right views are likewise. All their thoughts, destinations, and other actions are respectable. There aren’t any worldly people who aren’t delighted by them. Why is that? It’s because their right views are wonderful.
5. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should cultivate right view. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
6. When the bhikkhus heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.583b3-14]. It’s parallels are [AN 1.315] and [SF 206]. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 25 February 2025


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea17.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA17.6]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA17.6]], [[AN1.315]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA17]]  / 🌐 [[EA17.6]]
> ◄  [[ea17.5-patton]] 📜  [[ea19.1-patton]] ►
