---
sutta_code: "EA19.2"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 19.2 "
  - "Two Things"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA19]]  / 🌐 [[EA19.2]]
> ◄  [[ea19.1-patton]] 📜  [[ea24.5-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 19: The Request

2. Two Things
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at Ṛṣipatana in the Deer Preserve of Bārāṇasī.
2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “There are these two things that someone training on the path should not go near. What are these two things? They are attachment to [1] desire, pleasurable things, which are inferior, common, and base things, and [2] all the many forms of hardship and mortification. These are called the two things that someone training on the path should not go near.
3. “Thus, after abandoning these two things, I myself possessed the essential path to achieve right awakening. Vision and knowledge arose, and my mind became peaceful. I attained the penetrating knowledges, achieved the fruits of the ascetic, and arrived at _nirvāṇa_.
4. “What is that essential path that achieves right awakening, gives rise to vision and knowledge, makes the mind peaceful, attains the penetrating knowledges and the fruits of the ascetic, and arrives at _nirvāṇa_? It’s this noble eightfold path, which refers to right view, right discipline, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right method, right mindfulness, and right _samādhi_. This is called the essential path.
5. “Now, I’ve achieved right awakening. Vision and knowledge arose, and my mind became peaceful. I attained the penetrating knowledges, achieved the fruits of the ascetic, and arrived at _nirvāṇa_. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train by abandoning the above two things and practicing the essential path. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
6. The bhikkhus who heard what the Buddha taught then rejoiced and approved.
Summary Verse
- [17.1] Rāhula, [18.4] Kāśyapa, [18.5] Ajātaśatru’s Elephant,    
    [18.6-7] Two with Nanda, [18.8] Mahāprajāpatī,    
    [18.9] Slander, [19.1] not Brahmā’s Dharma,    
    And [19.2] two things are last.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.593b24-c12]. Partial parallels include SN 56.11 and T109. This _sūtra_ includes only the material regarding the eightfold path being a middle way between two extreme types of religious practice. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 19 December 2024


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea19.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA19.2]], [[MA204]], [[EA19.1]], [[EA24.5]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA19.2]], [[PLI-TV-KD1]], [[MA204]], [[SN22.59]], [[SN56.12]], [[SN56.11]], [[PLI-TV-KD1]], [[DN14]], [[EA19.1]], [[EA24.5]], [[MN100]], [[MN26]], [[MN36]], [[MN85]], [[SN6.1]], [[PLI-TV-KD15]], [[AN4.114]], [[AN4.157]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN5.140]], [[AN5.251-253]], [[DHP\|DHP353]], [[DN22]], [[ITI38]], [[KP1]], [[MN125]], [[MN2]], [[SN11.17]], [[SN12.1]], [[SN22.61]], [[SN35.28]], [[SN4.15]], [[SN4.25]], [[SN4.4]], [[SN4.5]], [[UD1.1]], [[UD1.2]], [[UD1.3]], [[UD1.4]], [[UD2.1]], [[PLI-TV-BI-VB-PC71]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PC65]], [[PLI-TV-KD16]], [[PLI-TV-KD18]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA19]]  / 🌐 [[EA19.2]]
> ◄  [[ea19.1-patton]] 📜  [[ea24.5-patton]] ►
