---
sutta_code: "EA24.5"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 24.5 "
  - "Miraculous Transformations"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA24]]  / 🌐 [[EA24.5]]
> ◄  [[ea19.2-patton]] 📜  [[ea24.6-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 24: The Tall Flag

5. Miraculous Transformations
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was sitting under the _bodhi_ tree in Magadha when he first became a Buddha.
Who to Teach First
2. It was then that the Bhagavān had this thought, “Now, I have attained this profound Dharma that’s hard to understand, hard to comprehend, hard to realize, and hard to know. It’s an extremely subtle and sublime knowledge that I’ve realized and known. Now, to whom will I explain this teaching first? Who’ll understand this teaching of mine?”
3. The Bhagavān then thought, “Āḷāra Kālāma’s faculties are fully matured. He should be the first to be liberated. He had provided me with the Dharma, too.”
4. After he had that thought, there was a god in the sky that said to the Bhagavān, “Āḷāra Kālāma died seven days ago.”
5. The Bhagavān again thought, “How terrible for him! He didn’t hear my Dharma before he reached the end of his life. If he had heard my Dharma, he would’ve been liberated immediately.”
6. The Bhagavān again had this thought, “To whom will I explain this Dharma first? Who could it liberate? Now, Udraka Rāmaputra should be the first to be liberated. I will give him a teaching. After he hears my Dharma, he’ll be the first to be liberated.”
7. When the Bhagavān had that thought, a god in the sky told him, “Just yesterday night, he reached the end of his life.”
8. The Bhagavān then thought, “How terrible for Udraka Rāmaputra! He didn’t to hear my Dharma before he reached the end of his life. If he had heard my Dharma, he would have been liberated immediately.”
9. The Bhagavān then thought, “Who’ll be the first to hear this Dharma and attain liberation?” The Bhagavān then contemplated this once again: “There were five bhikkhus who were of great benefit to me. They had followed me since I was first born.”
10. Again, the Bhagavān thought, “Where are those five bhikkhus now?” He then used his heavenly eye to observe the five bhikkhus, who were residing at the Residence of Sages in the deer preserve of Bārāṇasī. “I’ll go there now, and they’ll be the first to whom I explain this teaching. After they hear my teaching, they’ll be liberated.”
Seven Days at the Bodhi Tree
11. The Bhagavān spent seven days stared at the _bodhi_ tree, and his eyes never blinked. He then spoke these verses:
- “Here I am sitting in this place,    
    Having passed through the pain of birth and death.    
    I picked up the ax of wisdom    
    And cut forever its root origin.
- A god king came to me,    
    And a host of _māra_s did, too.    
    Again using the ways to defeat them,    
    I could don the crown of liberation.
- Now, I am here under this tree,    
    Seated upon a seat made of diamond,    
    I’ve obtained knowledge of everything,    
    Acquired wisdom obstructed by nothing.
- Here I sit under this tree,    
    Observing the pains of birth and death.    
    Gone forever is the origin of death,    
    With no old age or illness remaining.”
12. After he spoke these verses, the Bhagavān then rose from his seat and set out for Bārāṇasī.
The Ascetic Upaka
13. It was then that the ascetic Upaka saw the Bhagavān from afar. His glowing form was clear and bright, blotting out the light of the sun and moon. Upon seeing him, Upaka said to the Bhagavān, “Gautama, where is your teacher? On whom did you rely when you left home to train on the path? About what Dharma teaching do you always delight discussing? Where are you coming from, and where are you going?”
14. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses to that ascetic:
- “I’ve become an _arhat_,    
    Supreme and without compare in the world.    
    Among gods and worldly people,    
    I am now the highest.
- “I have neither a teacher    
    Nor any other equal, either.    
    I’m the only worthy who’s without flaw,    
    Who’s cooled and won’t be warmed again.
- I will now turn the Dharma wheel    
    And go visit Kāśī city.    
    Now, I’ll use the immortal medicine,    
    To dispel their benightedness.
- The realm of Bārāṇasī,    
    The royal land of Kāśī,    
    That’s where the five bhikkhus are living,    
    To whom I’m going to explain this subtle Dharma.
- Swiftly will they become awakened    
    And realize their contaminants have ended.    
    Eliminating the origin of what’s evil,    
    Therefore, is the greatest thing.”
15. That ascetic mockingly bowed his head and put his palms together. He then snapped his fingers with a smile, set out on the road, and departed.
Converting the Five bhikkhus
16. The Bhagavān went on to Bārāṇasī. Those five bhikkhus saw the Bhagavān coming from afar. When they did, they held a discussion about him: “That’s the ascetic Gautama coming in the distance. He has a confused disposition, and his mind isn’t focused. We shouldn’t speak with him again, nor get up to look at him or ask him to sit.”
17. Those five bhikkhus then spoke this verse:
- “That man isn’t worthy of respect,    
    Nor should he be befriended or looked at.    
    Don’t again say, ‘Welcome!’ to him;    
    Don’t ask him to sit down, either.”
18. After the five bhikkhus spoke this verse, they fell silent. When the Bhagavān arrived there, he eventually approached the five bhikkhus. They then got up to watch him come. Some of them prepared a seat; others fetched water. The Bhagavān then took the seat that was readied in front of him, and he thought, “These foolish men aren’t capable of keeping their to own restrictions in the end.”
19. The five bhikkhus then called the Bhagavān “friend.” He told the five bhikkhus, “You are not friends to an unsurpassed _arhat_ who is completely awakened. Why is that? I’m now an unsurpassed _arhat_, a completely awakened one, who has gained the virtue of immortality. Focus your thoughts and listen to my words of Dharma.”
20. The five bhikkhus then said to the Bhagavān, “Gautama, when you practiced asceticism before, you still weren’t able to attain the way of a superior man. How could someone whose mind was so confused say today that he has attained awakening?”
21. The Bhagavān asked them, “How is it, five bhikkhus? Have you ever heard me tell a lie?”
The five bhikkhus said, “No, Gautama.”
22. The Bhagavān told them, “The Tathāgata, the Completely Awakened One, has attained the immortal. All of you, focus your minds and listen to my Dharma teaching.” The Bhagavān then thought, “I can train these five men now.”
Turning the Dharma Wheel
23. The Bhagavān then told the five bhikkhus, “You should know, there are these four truths. What are the four? The truth of suffering, truth of the formation of suffering, truth of the cessation of suffering, and the truth of the escape from suffering.
24. “What’s called the truth of suffering? It’s the suffering of birth, suffering of old age, suffering of illness, suffering of death, suffering of sorrow, and suffering of grief, which cannot be described. It’s also the suffering of association with what’s hated, suffering of separation from what’s loved, and the suffering of not getting what’s desired. Essentially speaking, it’s the suffering of the five proliferating aggregates. This is called the truth of suffering.
25. “What’s the truth of the formation of suffering? It’s the factors of feeling and craving. When making a habit of them without tire, the mind is constantly covetous and attached to them. This is called the truth of the formation of suffering.
26. “What’s the truth of the cessation of suffering? It’s possible to make that craving cease and end without remainder so that it doesn’t arise again. This is called the truth of suffering’s cessation.
27. “What is the truth of the escape from suffering? It’s the noble eightfold path, which is right view, right discipline, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right method, right mindfulness, and right _samādhi_. This is called the Dharma of four truths.
28. “Moreover, five bhikkhus, in this Dharma of four truths, the truth of suffering is a principle never heard before that gives rise to vision, knowledge, insight, awakening, light, and wisdom. Furthermore, the truth of suffering is real, definite, neither fake nor false, and doesn’t ever change. It’s a teaching by the Bhagavān; therefore, it’s called the truth of suffering.
29. “The truth of the formation of suffering is a principle never heard before that gives rise to vision, knowledge, insight, awakening, light, and wisdom. Furthermore, the truth of the formation of suffering is real, definite, neither fake nor false, and doesn’t ever change. It’s a teaching by the Bhagavān; therefore, it’s called the truth of the formation of suffering.
30. “The truth of the cessation of suffering is a principle never heard before that gives rise to vision, knowledge, insight, awakening, light, and wisdom. Furthermore, the truth of the cessation of suffering is real, definite, neither fake nor false, and doesn’t ever change. It’s a teaching by the Bhagavān; therefore, it’s called the truth of the cessation of suffering.
31. “The truth of the escape from suffering is a principle never heard before that gives rise to vision, knowledge, insight, awakening, light, and wisdom. Furthermore, the truth of the escape from suffering is real, definite, and neither fake nor false, and it doesn’t ever change. It’s a teaching by the Bhagavān; therefore, it’s called the truth of the escape from suffering.
32. “Five bhikkhus, you should know the three turnings and twelve steps of these four truths. Someone who doesn’t truly know them doesn’t achieve the unsurpassed, correct, and complete awakening. It was by discerning the three turnings and twelve steps of these four truths and truly knowing them that I achieved the unsurpassed, correct, and complete awakening.”
33. Once he had explained this teaching, Ajñāta Kauṇḍinya’s dust and defilements were ended, and his Dharma eye was clarified.
34. The Bhagavān then addressed Kauṇḍinya, “Have you grasped the Dharma and attained the Dharma now?”
Kauṇḍinya replied, “Yes, Bhagavān! I’ve attained the Dharma and obtained the Dharma.”
35. After hearing this discourse, the spirit of the earth called out, “The Tathāgata has turned the Dharma wheel while staying in Bārāṇasī. None of the gods, worldly people, and demons or the god Māra, humans, and non-humans could turn it, but today the Tathāgata has turned the Dharma wheel. Ajñāta Kauṇḍinya has also attained the immortal Dharma!”
36. The four god kings then heard the earth spirit’s call and passed it on: “Ajñāta Kauṇḍinya has attained the immortal Dharma!”
37. The Trāyastriṃśa gods also heard it from the four god kings … the Yama gods heard it from the Trāyastriṃśa gods … the Tuṣita gods in turn heard the call … the Brahma gods also heard the call: “The Tathāgata has turned the Dharma wheel while staying in Bārāṇasī. None of the gods, worldly people, and demons or the god Māra, humans, and non-humans could turn it, but today the Tathāgata has turned the Dharma wheel …” It was then that he was named Ajñāta Kauṇḍinya.
Teaching the Five bhikkhus
38. It was then that the Bhagavān told the five bhikkhus, “You two stay here and receive instruction, and you three go and solicit alms. When the three of you have gotten alms, then the six of us will share a meal. You three then will stay to receive instruction, and you two go and solicit alms. When the two of you have gotten alms, the six of us will take our meal.”
39. He instructed them for a time, and they achieved the birthless quality of _nirvāṇa_, and they became birthless, without illness, ageless, and deathless. The five bhikkhus then all became _arhat_s. At that point, there were five _arhat_s, with the Buddha as the sixth, in a billion lands.
40. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the five bhikkhus, “All of you go together to solicit alms from people. Be heedful, and don’t go alone. Moreover, when there are sentient beings whose faculties are fully matured, they should be liberated. I will go to town of Uruvilvā to teach the Dharma there.”
Taming the Evil Serpent
41. The Bhagavān then went to the town of Uruvilvā. There was a Kāśyapa living near there on the shore of the Nairañjanā River. He knew astronomy and geography, and there was nothing he didn’t comprehend. He even knew how to calculate the number of leaves in a tree. He led five hundred disciples, whom he instructed daily. There was a cave not far away from Kāśyapa, and a poisonous serpent lived in that cave.
42. It was then that the Bhagavān visited Kāśyapa. When he arrived, he said to Kāśyapa, “I’d like to stay for a night in the cave. If you would permit me, I’ll go there to stay.”
Kāśyapa replied, “I wouldn’t begrudge it to you, but there is a poisonous serpent there that’s frightful and dangerous.”
43. The Bhagavān told him, “Kāśyapa, that’s no problem. That serpent won’t hurt me. I just need permission to stay there for a night.”
Kāśyapa replied, “If you want to stay there, then do as you like.”
44. The Bhagavān then went to the cave and prepared a seat for the night. Sitting down cross-legged with upright body and mind, he fixed his attention to what was in front of him. At that point, the poisonous serpent saw the Bhagavān sitting there and spat flaming venom at him. The Bhagavān at that moment had entered a _samādhi_ of kindness. He emerged from that _samādhi_ of kindness and entered a _samādhi_ of blazing light. The serpent’s fire and the Buddha’s light were produced right at the same time.
45. Kāśyapa got up that night to look up at the stars, and he saw the light of a large fire in the cave. Seeing that, he told a disciple, “This ascetic Gautama was handsome, but now he’s being killed by that serpent. What a pity! I told him earlier that it was there. ‘There’s an evil serpent; you can’t stay the night there.’” Kāśyapa then told his five hundred disciples, “Get pitchers of water and high ladders and go douse that fire! Save that ascetic from danger!”
46. Kāśyapa then led his five hundred disciples to the cave to put out the fire. Some of them carried water and others brought ladders, but they weren’t able to put out the fire. It was the Bhagavān’s power that did. The Bhagavān then entered the _samādhi_ of kindness and slowly made that serpent stop being hateful. The evil serpent’s mind then became fearful. It fled east and west, trying to leave the cave, but it wasn’t able to find the exit. The evil serpent then went to the Tathāgata and coiled up in his alms bowl.
47. The Bhagavān stroked the evil serpent’s body with his right hand and spoke these verses:
- “Serpent, escaping is so hard to do    
    When two serpents meet each other.    
    Serpent, don’t create harmful thoughts.    
    Escaping is so hard to do, serpent.
- In numbers like the Gaṅgā River’s sands,    
    Buddhas have _parinirvāṇa_-d.    
    You haven’t met any of them;    
    That’s the reason for your hateful fire.
- Have good thoughts toward the Tathāgata;    
    Quickly abandon this hateful venom.    
    Once the venom of hate is gone,    
    Then you’ll be born up in heaven.”
End of Fascicle 14
Beginning of Fascicle 15


48. The evil serpent then stuck out its tongue, licked the Tathāgata’s hand, and looked up at his face.
49. Early the next morning, the Bhagavān carried the evil serpent in his hand and went to Kāśyapa. He said to Kāśyapa, “Here is the evil serpent that’s so dangerous. It’s tame now.”
50. When he saw the evil serpent, Kāśyapa was terrified. He said to the Bhagavān, “Stop! Stop, ascetic! Don’t come any closer! That serpent looks ready to strike!”
The Bhagavān said, “Kāśyapa, don’t be afraid! I’ve tamed it. It’ll never harm anyone. Why is that? Because this serpent has accepted my instruction.”
51. Kāśyapa and his five hundred disciples then praised this unprecedented thing: “Amazing! Extraordinary! This ascetic Gautama has such miraculous power that he can tame this evil serpent and make it do no evil. Even so, it’s not like the truth that we’ve attained.”
52. Kāśyapa then said to the Bhagavān, “Great ascetic, will you accept my invitation to stay for ninety days? I’ll supply you with all the clothes, food, seats, bedding, and the medicine for ailments that you’ll need.”
The Bhagavān then silently accepted Kāśyapa’s invitation.
53. The Bhagavān released that magical serpent into the ocean, and that evil serpent lived for a certain time there. After its life ended, it was born up in the Heaven of the Four God Kings. The Tathāgata then returned to stay in the cave.
Miraculous Gifts
54. After he had arranged for a variety of foods to be provided, Kāśyapa then went and said to the Bhagavān, “A meal is ready; you can go eat.”
The Bhagavān told him, “Kāśyapa, you go first; I’ll be right behind you.” After Kāśyapa had left, he went to the top of Jambudvīpa and picked a Jambu fruit from under the Jambu tree there. He then returned to sit in the cave before Kāśyapa came back.
55. When he saw the Bhagavān there in the cave, Kāśyapa said to him, “Ascetic, what path did you take to come back to this cave?”
The Buddha told Kāśyapa, “After you left, I went to the top of Jambudvīpa and picked a Jambu fruit from under the Jambu tree. I then returned to sit here. Kāśyapa, you should know that this fruit is fragrant. You can take it for your meal.”
56. Kāśyapa replied, “I don’t need it. Ascetic, take it for your own meal.” Then Kāśyapa again thought, “This ascetic has such miraculous abilities; he’s quite powerful. He’s even able to go to the top of Jambudvīpa and pick this delicious fruit. Even so, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
After he had eaten, the Bhagavān returned to his place for the night.
57. Early in the morning, Kāśyapa went to the Bhagavān. When he arrived, he said to the Bhagavān, “Mealtime has arrived; you can go eat.”
The Buddha told Kāśyapa, “You go first; I’ll go later.” After Kāśyapa had left, he went to the top of Jambudvīpa and picked an _āmalaka_ fruit. He then returned to sit in the cave before Kāśyapa came back.
58. Kāśyapa said to the Bhagavān, “Ascetic, what path did you take to come back here?”
The Bhagavān told him, “After you left, I went to the top of Jambudvīpa, picked this fruit, and came back. It’s very fragrant. If you need it, you can have it to eat.”
59. Kāśyapa replied, “I don’t need it. Ascetic, take it for your own meal.”
Then Kāśyapa again thought, “This ascetic has such miraculous abilities; he’s quite powerful. After I left, he picked this fruit and came back. Even so, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
60. After he had eaten, the Bhagavān returned to his place for the night.
61. The next day, Kāśyapa went to the Bhagavān and said, “Mealtime has arrived; you can go eat.”
The Buddha told Kāśyapa, “You go first; I’ll go later.” After Kāśyapa had left, the Bhagavān went north to Uttarakuru, took some naturally cooked rice. He returned to the cave before Kāśyapa came back.
62. Kāśyapa asked the Buddha, “Ascetic, what path did you take to come back and sit here?”
The Bhagavān told him, “Kāśyapa, you should know that after you left, I went to Uttarakuru and brought back some naturally cooked rice. It’s very fragrant. Kāśyapa, if you need it, you can have it to eat.”
63. Kāśyapa replied, “I don’t need it. Ascetic, take it for your own meal.” Kāśyapa again thought, “This ascetic has such miraculous abilities; he’s quite powerful. Even so, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
64. After he had eaten, the Bhagavān returned to his place for the night.
65. The next day, Kāśyapa went to the Bhagavān and said, “Mealtime has arrived; you can go eat.”
The Buddha told Kāśyapa, “You go first; I’ll go later.” After Kāśyapa left, the Bhagavān went to Godānīya, picked a black myrobalan fruit. He then returned to sit in the cave before Kāśyapa came back.
66. Kāśyapa asked the Buddha, “Ascetic, what path did you take to come back and sit here?”
The Buddha told Kāśyapa, “After you left, I went to Godānīya and brought back this fruit. It’s very fragrant. Kāśyapa, if you need it, you can take it to eat.”
67. Kāśyapa replied, “I don’t need it. Ascetic, take it for your own meal.” Kāśyapa again thought, “This ascetic has such miraculous abilities; he’s quite powerful. Even so, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
68. After he had eaten, the Bhagavān then returned to his place for the night.
69. The next day, Kāśyapa went to the Bhagavān and said, “The time has arrived; you can go eat.”
The Buddha told Kāśyapa, “You go first; I’ll go later.” After Kāśyapa left, the Bhagavān went to Pūrvavideha, picked a _bahera_ myrobalan fruit. He returned to sit in the cave before Kāśyapa came back.
70. Kāśyapa asked the Buddha, “Ascetic, what path did you take to come back and sit here?”
The Buddha told Kāśyapa, “After you left, I went to Pūrvavideha and brought back this fruit. It’s very fragrant. Kāśyapa, if you need it, you can take it to eat.”
71. Kāśyapa replied, “I don’t need it. Ascetic, take it for your own meal.” Kāśyapa again thought, “This ascetic has such miraculous abilities; he’s quite powerful. Even so, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
72. After he had eaten, the Bhagavān returned to his place for the night.
The Ceremonial Fire
73. Kāśyapa then was going to perform a large sacrifice. His five hundred disciples took up axes to chop the firewood, but when they lifted the axes in their hands, the axes wouldn’t go down. Kāśyapa then thought, “Surely, this is that ascetic’s doing.” Kāśyapa then asked the Bhagavān, “We would like to chop firewood now. Why won’t the axes go down?”
The Bhagavān asked, “Would you like the axes to go down?”
“We would like to lower the axes.” They immediately dropped.
74. After the axes had gone down, they couldn’t be lifted again. Kāśyapa again asked the Buddha, “Why won’t the axes go up?”
The Bhagavān asked him, “Would you like the axes to go up?”
“We would like the axes to go up.” They immediately rose up.
75. Kāśyapa’s disciples then decided to start the fire, but the fire wouldn’t light. Kāśyapa again thought, “Surely, this is the ascetic Gautama’s doing.” Kāśyapa said to the Buddha, “Why won’t the fire light?”
The Buddha asked Kāśyapa, “Would you like to light the fire?”
“We would like to light the fire.” It immediately was lit.
76. They then decided to douse the fire, but the fire wouldn’t go out. Kāśyapa asked the Buddha, “Why won’t the fire go out?”
The Buddha asked, “Would you like the fire to go out?”
“We would like the fire to go out.” It immediately went out.
77. Kāśyapa then thought, “This ascetic Gautama has handsome features; he’s extraordinary for this world. Tomorrow, I’m going to perform a large sacrifice, and the King and the people will come and gather. If they meet this ascetic, I won’t get their offerings anymore. It would be a great fortune for me if that ascetic didn’t come tomorrow.”
78. Knowing that thought in Kāśyapa’s mind, the Bhagavān went to Uttarakuru the next day early in the morning. He took some naturally cooked rice from there, went to Godānīya to get milk, and then went to Lake Anavatapta to eat. At the end of the day, he returned to the cave at sunset to spend the night.
79. The next day, Kāśyapa went to the Bhagavān and asked, “Ascetic, why didn’t you come yesterday?”
The Buddha told Kāśyapa, “Yesterday, you had the thought, ‘This ascetic Gautama has handsome features; he’s extraordinary for this world. Tomorrow will be my large sacrifice. If the King and the people see him, they’ll stop supporting me. It would be a great fortune for me if that ascetic didn’t come.’ I immediately knew that thought in your mind, so I went to Uttarakuru to get some naturally cooked rice, went to Godānīya for milk, and then went to source of Lake Anavatapta to eat. At the end of the day, I returned to the cave at sunset to spend the night.”
80. Kāśyapa again had this thought, “This ascetic has such miraculous abilities; he’s quite powerful. Even so, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
The Gods Visit the Bhagavān
81. After the Bhagavān had eaten, he returned to the cave for the night. That night, the four god kings visited the Bhagavān and listened to the _sūtra_ teachings. The four god kings were radiant, and the Buddha also emitted a great radiance. They illuminated the mountain wilderness, which blazed with a singular color.
82. Kāśyapa saw their radiance that night, and he went to the Bhagavān at sunrise the next day. Upon arriving there, he asked the Bhagavān, “What was so radiant that it illuminated this mountain wilderness last night?”
The Bhagavān told him, “The four god kings came to visit me and listened to the Dharma. It was the radiance of those four god kings.”
83. Kāśyapa again had the thought, “This ascetic Gautama has such miraculous abilities that even the four god kings come to listen to his _sūtra_ teachings. Even though he has this power, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
84. After the Bhagavān had eaten, he returned to the cave for the night. At midnight, Śakra the Lord of the Gods visited the Bhagavān to listen to the Dharma. The Lord of the Gods’ radiance also illuminated that mountain.
85. That night, Kāśyapa got up to look at the stars, and he saw this radiance. He went to the Bhagavān at sunrise the next day and asked, “Gautama, what was that extraordinary radiance last night? What were the causes and conditions for that radiance?”
The Bhagavān told him, “Last night, the Lord of the Gods came here to listen to the _sūtra_s. The radiance was just because of that.”
86. Kāśyapa again had the thought, “This ascetic Gautama has such miraculous abilities; he’s quite powerful. Even the Lord of the Gods visits him to listen to his _sūtra_ teachings. Even so, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
87. After the Bhagavān had eaten, he returned to the cave for the night. At midnight, the God King Brahmā emitted a great radiance that illuminated the mountain while he visited the Bhagavān and listened to the _sūtra_ teachings.
88. That night, Kāśyapa got up and saw the radiance. The next day he went to the Bhagavān and asked, “Last night, there was a radiance that was twice as bright as before. It was brighter than the sun and moon! What were the causes and conditions that brought about this radiance?”
The Bhagavān told him, “Kāśyapa, you should know that last night the great God King Brahmā came to me to listen to the _sūtra_ teachings.”
89. Kāśyapa again thought, “This ascetic Gautama has such miraculous ability. Even our ancestral father visits this ascetic to listen to his _sūtra_ teachings. Even so, it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
Washing the Bhagavān’s Robes
90. The Bhagavān then had obtained a fivefold robe that was in tatters, and he decided to wash it. He thought, “Where will I go to wash this robe?”
Śakra the Lord of the Gods then knew that thought in the Bhagavān’s mind. He magically created a bathing pool and said to the Bhagavān, “You can wash your robes there.”
91. The Bhagavān again had the thought, “Where will I lay out the robe to wash it?”
The four god kings then knew that thought in the Bhagavān’s mind and presented a large, square stone to him, which they put next to the water. They said to the Bhagavān, “You can lay out your robes there.”
92. Then, the Bhagavān had another thought, “Where will I leave these robes to dry?”
A tree spirit knew that thought in the Bhagavān’s mind, and it then lowered a tree limb. It said to the Bhagavān, “Please leave your robes to dry here.”
93. The next day, Kāśyapa went to the Bhagavān at sunrise and asked him, “It wasn’t here before, but now here’s this pool. It wasn’t here before, but now here’s this tree. It wasn’t here before, but now here’s this stone. What causes and conditions has brought these things about?”
The Bhagavān told him, “Last night, Śakra the Lord of the Gods knew that I wanted to wash my robes, so he created this bathing pool. I then had the thought, ‘Where will I lay out my robes to wash them?’ Then, the four god kings knew that thought in my mind, and they brought me this stone. I also thought, ‘Where will I leave these robes to dry?’ Then, a tree spirit knew that thought in my mind, and then it lowered this tree limb.”
94. Kāśyapa again thought, “This ascetic Gautama may be miraculous, but it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
Walking on Water
95. After the Bhagavān had eaten, he returned to his place for the night. Then, a large, black cloud appeared at midnight, and it brought a great rainstorm. The great Nairañjanā River became a raging torrent. Kāśyapa thought, “This river is a raging torrent. Surely that ascetic will be swept away! I’ll go look for him now!”
96. Kāśyapa and his five hundred disciples went to the river. There, the Bhagavān was walking on top of the water, and his legs didn’t get wet. Kāśyapa watched the Bhagavān walking on the water from afar. He then thought, “Amazing! Extraordinary! The ascetic Gautama can walk on water! I’m able to walk on water, too, but I can’t keep my legs from getting soiled. This ascetic Gautama may be miraculous, but it’s not the same as the truth that I’ve attained.”
The Conversion of Uruvilvā Kāśyapa
97. The Bhagavān said to Kāśyapa, “You are still not an _arhat_, and you don’t know the awakening of an _arhat_. You aren’t even aware of the name ‘_arhat_,’ so how could you attain that awakening? You are a blind man without the eyes to see. The Tathāgata has performed so many miracles, so you say, ‘It’s not the same as the truth I’ve attained.’ You compare yourself by saying, ‘I’m able to walk on water.’ Now is the right time for it. Can you walk on the water with me? You can abandon the wrong views in your mind now, and then there’ll be nothing to cause you to experience this suffering for the long night.”
98. When he heard what the Bhagavān said, Kāśyapa faced him and bowed at his feet. “Now, I repent my mistake, deeply knowing what’s not the Dharma. I’ve troubled a Tathāgata. Please accept my repentance!” He repeated this three times.
The Bhagavān told him, “I accept your repentance since you recognize that you have troubled a Tathāgata.”
99. Kāśyapa then addressed his five hundred disciples, “Each of you should do what you think is fitting, but I’m taking refuge in the ascetic Gautama now.”
100. His five hundred disciples then said to Kāśyapa, “We had that thought about the ascetic Gautama before. When he tamed the serpent, we immediately wanted to take refuge in him. If the teacher himself is taking refuge in Gautama, then we five hundred disciples will all take refuge in Gautama as well.”
Kāśyapa replied, “Now is the right time. It was just that my mind was attached to this foolishness. Seeing so many miracles, I still didn’t understand, so I said, ‘My way is correct.’”
101. Kāśyapa then led his five hundred disciples who surrounded him in front and behind, and they went to the Bhagavān. They bowed their heads at his feet and withdrew to stand to one side. He then said to the Bhagavān, “Please, Bhagavān, permit us to become ascetics and cultivate the pure practice!”
102. The eternal way of _buddha_s is that if they say, “Welcome, monk!” then one becomes an ascetic. The Bhagavān told Kāśyapa, “Welcome, monk! This teaching is subtle, so cultivate the religious practice well!” The robes that Kāśyapa and his five hundred disciples were wearing all turned reddish-brown, and the hair of their heads fell out on its own. They looked like they had shaved their heads for seven days. Kāśyapa then tossed all of his implements for studying magic and incantations into the river.
103. His five hundred disciples then said to the Bhagavān, “Please, Bhagavān, permit us to become ascetics!”
The Bhagavān said, “Welcome, bhikkhus!” Those five hundreds disciples became ascetics dressed in reddish-brown, and the hair on their heads fell out on its own.
The Conversion of Nadī Kāśyapa
104. They followed the river downstream to where the ascetic named Nadī Kāśyapa lived on the riverbank. It was then that Nadī Kāśyapa saw all their implements of magic and incantations floating in the water. He then thought, “What? Did my older brother drown in the river?” Nadī Kāśyapa then led his three hundred disciples upstream searching for his brother’s body. He saw the Bhagavān sitting under a tree from afar, teaching Dharma to Great Kāśyapa and his five hundred disciples who surrounded him in front and behind. Seeing that, he went up to Kāśyapa and asked him, “What fine thing is this? A man who was once a teacher is now a disciple! Why did my older brother become a disciple of this ascetic that he accompanies?”
Uruvelā Kāśyapa replied, “It’s a wonderful thing! There are no faults here.”
105. He then spoke a verse to Nadī Kāśyapa:
- “This teacher esteemed by humans and gods    
    Is the teacher whom I serve now.    
    Buddhas do arise in the world,    
    But it’s exceedingly rare to meet one!”
106. When Nadī Kāśyapa heard the title “Buddha,” he felt ecstatic, danced in celebration, and was unable to control himself. He went before the Bhagavān and said, “May I hear about the path?”
The Bhagavān told him, “Welcome, monk! Cultivate the religious practice well until the end of suffering is reached!”
107. Nadī Kāśyapa then became an ascetic along with his three hundred disciples. All of them were dressed in reddish-brown, and the hair of their heads fell out on its own. Nadī Kāśyapa and his three hundred disciples then tossed all their implements of magic and incantations into the river.
The Conversion of Gayā Kāśyapa
108. They then followed the river downstream to where the ascetic named Gayā Kāśyapa was living on the riverbank. He saw their implements of magic and incantations floating in the river from afar and thought, “I have two brothers upstream who are religious bhikkhus. Now, all these implements of magic and incantations are floating in the river. The river must have killed those two great Kāśyapas!” He then led his two hundred disciples upstream until they reached that place where incantations had been studied. He saw from afar that his two brothers had become ascetics and said, “What fine thing is this? Men who were once the worthies now are ascetic disciples!”
Those Kāśyapas replied, “It’s a wonderful thing! There are no faults here.”
109. Gayā Kāśyapa then thought, “Now, these two brothers of mine are knowledgeable and erudite. This must be a virtuous place for my two brothers to train on the path here. I can train on the path here as well!” Gayā Kāśyapa then went before the Bhagavān and said, “Please, Bhagavān, permit me to become an ascetic!”
The Bhagavān told him, “Welcome, monk! Cultivate the religious practice well until the end of suffering is reached!”
110. Gayā Kāśyapa then became an ascetic dressed in reddish-brown, and the hair on his head fell out on its own. He looked like he had shaved his head for seven days.
Three Ways of Teaching
111. The Bhagavān then stayed there on the riverbank under a banyan tree. It hadn’t been long since he became a _buddha_, and he was leading a thousand disciples. They were elders who had practiced for a long time. The Bhagavān educated them in three ways. What were the three? He educated them with miraculous abilities, educated them with verbal teachings, and educated them with instruction.
112. How did he educate them with miraculous abilities? The Bhagavān would sometimes divide into any number of forms and then combine back into one again. Sometimes, he disappeared and reappeared. Sometimes, he passed through stone walls without any obstruction. Sometimes, he came out and went into the earth as though it were a flowing river without being blocked by it. Sometimes, he sat cross-legged and flew throughout the sky like a bird without any obstruction. He could also produce smoke without measure like a giant volcano. He wasn’t limited to the sun and moon when he went up and touched with his hand. He could go physically up to the Brahma Heaven. The Bhagavān displayed his miraculous abilities in these ways.
113. How did he educate them with verbal teachings? The Bhagavān taught the bhikkhus, “You must abandon that and establish this.” “You must stay close to this and away from that.” “You must think this and let that go.” “You must contemplate this and not contemplate that.”
“What must be cultivated and not cultivated? You must cultivate the seven factors of awakening and destroy the three bonds.”
“What must be contemplated and must not be contemplated? You must contemplate the three bonds and the virtues of the ascetic, which are the happiness of escape, the happiness of having no hostility, and the happiness of having no anger. What must not be contemplated? That refers to the three pains of the ascetic. What are the three? They are contemplation of desire, contemplation of hostility, and the contemplation of anger.”
“What’s to be thought and what’s not to be thought? You must think about the truth of suffering, must think about the truth of formation, must think about the truth of cessation, and must think about the truth of the path. Don’t think about wrong truths, which are the view of permanence, view of impermanence, view of limitation, and view of limitlessness. Don’t think these thoughts: ‘another life and another person,’ ‘that’s not a life and not a person,’ ‘the Tathāgata’s life ends,’ ‘the Tathāgata’s life doesn’t end,’ ‘he has an end and doesn’t end,’ and ‘he neither has an end nor has no end.’”
114. How did he educate them with instruction? “Furthermore, you must do this when you leave; you shouldn’t do that when you leave.” “Do this when you arrive; you shouldn’t do that when you arrive.” “Be silent, or do this when you speak.” “You must hold your robes this way; you shouldn’t hold your robes in that way.” “You should enter a town this way; you shouldn’t enter a town in that way.” This was how he educated them with instructions.
115. The Bhagavān then educated those 1,000 bhikkhus in these three subjects. When the bhikkhus had received the Buddha’s teaching, all 1,000 of them became _arhat_s. The Bhagavān then saw that those 1,000 bhikkhus had become _arhat_s. At that point, the region of Jambudvīpa had 1,000 _arhat_s, and the five bhikkhus and the Buddha made six teachers. He then turned to sit facing Kapilavastu.
The Buddha Returns to Kapilavastu
116. Then Uruvilvā Kāśyapa had the thought, “Why does the Bhagavān sit facing Kapilavastu?” Uruvilvā Kāśyapa then knelt down before the Bhagavān and asked, “I don’t understand, Tathāgata, but why do you sit facing Kapilavastu?”
The Bhagavān told him, “When a Tathāgata is present in the world, he should do five things. What are the five? First is to turn the Dharma wheel. Second is to teach the Dharma for his father. Third is to teach the Dharma for his mother. Fourth is to lead ordinary men to establish the _bodhisattva_ practice. Fifth is to give the prediction [of becoming a Buddha] to a _bodhisattva_. These, Kāśyapa, are the five things a Tathāgata appears in the world to do.”
117. Uruvilvā Kāśyapa again thought, “It’s because the Tathāgata is thinking of his kinsmen of his homeland that he sits facing that way.”
118. The five bhikkhus eventually came to the bank of the Nairañjanā River. They bowed their heads at the Bhagavān’s feet when they arrived and then sat to one side.
119. Venerable Udāyī then saw the Bhagavān was sitting in such a way that he was looking toward Kapilavastu from afar. Seeing that, he thought, “Surely, the Bhagavān will go to Kapilavastu to see his relatives there.” Udāyī then knelt before the Bhagavān and said, “I have a question now that’s worthy of asking, if you would please fully explain it.”
The Bhagavān told him, “If you have a question, then ask it.”
120. Udāyī said to the Bhagavān, “Examining the Tathāgata’s mind, [I see that] he wants to head for Kapilavastu.”
The Bhagavān told him, “Yes, it’s as you say. Udāyī, you should know that before I visit King Śuddhodana, I need to be his equal, then after that I will go. Why is that? Before the warrior tribe will honor someone, a messenger is sent to announce it. Afterward, the Tathāgata will go. When you arrive, tell the King this: ‘Seven days from now, the Tathāgata will come to see the King.’”
121. Udāyī replied, “Yes, Bhagavān.” Udāyī then rose from his seat, adjusted his robes, bowed at the Bhagavān’s feet, and then disappeared from in front of him. He went to Kapilavastu to visit King Śuddhodana. Upon arriving, he went and stood before the King.
122. King Śuddhodana was seated in a great hall with his concubines. Udāyī then flew up into the air, and King Śuddhodana saw Udāyī holding a bowl in his hand. Taking up his staff, the King stood in front of him. Looking at Udāyī, he was frightened and said, “What sort of person is this? Is he human or non-human? A god or a demon? A _yakṣa_, _rākṣasa_, god, _nāga_, or demonic spirit?”
123. King Śuddhodana then asked Udāyī, “What sort of person are you?” He also spoke this verse to Udāyī:
- “Are you a god or are you a demon?    
    Are you a _gandharva_ or something else?    
    What now should I call you?    
    This is what I want to know.”
124. Udāyī then replied to the King with these verses:
- “I am not a god    
    Nor am I a _gandharva_, either.    
    Here in Kapilavastu,    
    The Great King is a human of this land.
- He once destroyed eighteen million [demons]    
    That host of corrupt Māra Pāpīyān.    
    He is my teacher, the sage of Śākyas,    
    And I am his true disciple.”
125. King Śuddhodana again spoke to Udāyī in verse:
- “Who has destroyed eighteen million [demons]    
    Of that host of corrupt Māra Pāpīyān?    
    Who is it that’s called the ‘Sage of Śākyas’?    
    Now, I implore you to tell me.”
126. Udāyī then spoke these verses:
- “When the Tathāgata was just born,    
    There was an earthquake in heaven and earth.    
    He vowed to complete his task,    
    So today he’s called ‘Siddhārtha.’
- He defeated eighteen million [demons]    
    Of host of corrupt Māra Pāpīyān.    
    Today he’s called the sage of the Śākyas,    
    For he has achieved the path of _buddha_s.
- That man is the lion of the Śākyas.    
    The next disciple of Gautama    
    Today has become an ascetic    
    Who was formerly named Udāyī.”
127. When he heard this, King Śuddhodana felt overjoyed and couldn’t control himself. He said to Udāyī, “How is it, Udāyī? Is Prince Siddhārtha still as he was before?”
Udāyī replied, “The Buddha Śākyamuni is present today.”
128. The King asked, “He has become a Buddha now?”
Udāyī replied, “He has become a Buddha now.”
129. The King again asked, “Where has the Tathāgata ended up today?”
Udāyī replied, “The Tathāgata is presently in Magadha sitting under a banyan tree.”
130. The King replied, “Who are the disciples that serve him?”
Udāyī replied, “Millions of gods, a thousand bhikkhus, and the four god kings are always there on his left and right.”
131. The King asked, “What do the robes that he wears look like?”
Udāyī replied, “The robe and lower garment worn by the Tathāgata are called ‘reddish-brown.’”
132. The King asked, “What food does he eat?”
Udāyī replied, “The Tathāgata’s body is nourished by the Dharma.”
133. The King again asked, “How is it, Udāyī? Can I meet the Tathāgata?”
Udāyī replied, “Fear not, King! In seven day’s time, the Tathāgata will come to this city.”
134. The King felt overjoyed and couldn’t control himself. He served food and drink with his own hands as an offering to Udāyī.
135. King Śuddhodana then beat a great drum and ordered the kingdom’s people to repair the roads, remove refuse, sprinkle the ground with perfume, set up banners and canopies, play music, and other indescribable things. He also ordered all the deaf, blind, and mute people in the kingdom to stay inside and for everyone to enter the city after seven days had passed. Having heard that the Buddha would be coming to the city in seven days, King Śuddhodana couldn’t sleep.
Teaching Śuddhodana
136. When the seventh day arrived, the Bhagavān then thought, “Now, it would be fitting to use my miraculous abilities to go to Kapilavastu.” The Bhagavān then led the bhikkhus who surrounded him in front and back to Kapilavastu. Upon arriving, he then went to the cedar park that was north of the city.
137. King Śuddhodana heard that the Bhagavān had passed through Kapilavastu and was in the cedar park to the north. He then led a crowd of Śākyans to visit the Buddha there.
138. The Bhagavān thought, “If King Śuddhodana comes here in person, this won’t be fitting for me. I’ll go and meet with him now. Why is that? A father and mother’s love is great, and their nurturing feeling is deep.” The Bhagavān then led a crowd of bhikkhus to the city gate while flying in the air seven fathoms above the ground.
139. King Śuddhodana saw the Bhagavān, whose handsomeness was without comparison. He was extraordinary for this world. His faculties were peaceful, lacking a multitude of thoughts, and his body was adorned by thirty-two signs and eighty excellencies. Feeling encouraged, the King bowed his head at the Bhagavān’s feet and said, “I am the King of the warrior tribe named King Śuddhodana.”
140. The Bhagavān told him, “May the Great King’s life be without want. Therefore, Great King, you should rule with the correct Dharma; don’t rule with the wrong Dharma. Great King, you should know that those who rule using the correct Dharma are born in a good place up in heaven when their bodies break up and their lives end.”
141. The Bhagavān then walked on air to King Śuddhodana’s palace. When he arrived, he prepared a seat and sat down.
142. When he saw the Bhagavān sitting there settled, the King served him a variety of foods with his own hands. When he saw that the Bhagavān was finished eating, he brought clean water. He then fetched a small seat and listened to the Dharma.
143. The Bhagavān at that point gradually explained the sublime goal for King Śuddhodana. He discussed the topics of generosity, discipline, birth in heaven, desiring impure actions, and the happiness of escape. When the Bhagavān saw that the King’s mind was open and understood his intent, he expounded the Dharma that Buddhas and Bhagavāns always do about suffering, its formation, its cessation, and the path. He taught all this to the King.
144. There on his high seat, King Śuddhodana’s dust and defilements were removed, and his Dharma eye was clarified. After he had shared this exposition of the Dharma with the King, the Bhagavān rose from his seat and departed.
Ānanda and Aniruddha Become Disciples
145. King Śuddhodana called a meeting of the Śākya community and said, “These ascetics look disgraceful. The warrior tribe leads the community of priests, so this is not fitting for us. The Śākya tribe of warriors will find recruits from the warrior community. This will make them marvelous.”
The Śākyans replied, “Yes, Great King! As the King instructs, the warriors will find recruits from the warrior community. This will make them marvelous.”
146. The King announced to the kingdom, “Wherever there are two brothers, one will be chosen to pursue the path. Those who fail to do so will be severely punished.”
The community of Śākyans heard the King’s instruction and ordered it: “Where there are two brothers, one will be chosen for the path. Those who don’t follow this instruction will be severely punished.”
147. The Śākyan Devadatta said to the Śākyan Ānanda, “Today, King Śuddhodana has ordered, ‘Where there are two brothers, one will be chosen to become an ascetic.’ Now, you leave home to train on the path. I will remain at home and cultivate the occupation of the household.”
The Śākyan Ānanda rejoiced and celebrated. He replied, “As your brother, I’ll heed the order!”
148. The Śākyan Nanda then said to the Śākyan Aniruddha, “King Śuddhodana has instructed us, ‘Where there’s a second brother, one of them will be chosen to pursue the path. Those who fail to do so will be severely punished.’ Now, you will leave home, and I will live at home.”
When the Śākyan Aniruddha heard this, he rejoiced and celebrated, being unable to control himself. He replied, “Yes! As your brother, I’ll heed the order!”
149. King Śuddhodana then led the Śākyans Droṇodana, Śuklodana, and Amṛtodana to the Bhagavān. They rode in four-horse team chariots. [The first] chariot was white, had a white canopy, and was pulled by white horses. The second Śākyan rode a blue chariot with a blue canopy and was pulled by blue horses. The third Śākyan rode a yellow chariot with a yellow canopy and was pulled by yellow horses. The fourth Śākyan rode a red chariot with a red canopy and was pulled by red horses. There were also Śākyans riding elephants and others riding horses. They all went together as an assembly.
150. The Bhagavān saw King Śuddhodana leading this assembly of Śākyans from afar. He told the bhikkhus, “All of you, look at that assembly of Śākyans. Look at that assembly of King Śuddhodana. bhikkhus, you should know that when the Trayastriṃśa gods leave their pleasure garden, they do so in this way, too. There’s no difference at all.”
151. Ānanda rode a white elephant, wore white clothes, and had a white parasol. Seeing him, the Bhagavān told the bhikkhus, “All of you, do you see that Śākyan Ānanda riding a white elephant and wearing white clothes?”
The bhikkhus replied, “We do, Bhagavān. We see him.”
152. The Buddha told the bhikkhus, “This man will leave home to train on the path. He’ll be the best in learning and worthy of waiting on me left and right. Do all of you see that Śākyan Aniruddha there?”
The bhikkhus replied, “Indeed, we see him.”
153. The Buddha told the bhikkhus, “This man will leave home and train on the path. His heavenly vision will be the best.”
154. Nanda and Ānanda were in front of King Śuddhodana and his three brothers. They proceeded on foot after leaving behind the five fine items. When they reached the Bhagavān, they bowed their heads at his feet and sat to one side.
155. King Śuddhodana said to the Buddha, “Last night, I had this thought occur to me, ‘The community of warriors shouldn’t lead the community of priests. They should return to leading the warrior community. This would be fitting for them.’ I then gave this order to the kingdom, ‘Wherever there’s a second brother, one man will be chosen who’ll leave home and train on the path.’ Please, Bhagavān, permit them to leave home and train on the path.”
The Bhagavān told him, “Good, Great King! That will be helpful. It’ll bring peace to gods and humans. Why is that? These good friends are an excellent blessing and a field of merit. Good friends are a cause for attaining liberation from birth, old age, illness, and death to me as well.” That assembly of Śākyans then attained the path.
156. King Śuddhodana said to the Bhagavān, “Please, Bhagavān, instruct these new bhikkhus. They should be instructed like Udāyī. Why is that? That monk Udāyī has great miraculous abilities! May the monk Udāyī always be in the palace to educate us, making sentient beings gain well-being for a long time. Why is that? This monk has great miraculous abilities. When I first met the monk Udāyī, it made my heart rejoice. I then thought, ‘Even his disciples have miraculous abilities, so how could that Tathāgata not have such miraculous abilities?”
The Bhagavān told him, “Yes, Great King. As the Great King says, this monk Udāyī has amazing miraculous abilities and great majesty.”
157. The Bhagavān then addressed the bhikkhus, “My first disciple to be widely known, recognized by many, and remembered by the King is the monk Ajñāta Kauṇḍinya. The one who’s able to encourage the people is this monk Udāyī. The one who has a quick wit is this monk Mahānāma. The one who always delights in flying is this monk Subāhu. The one who comes and goes from the sky is this monk Vāṣpa. The one who has many disciples is this monk Uruvilvā Kāśyapa. The one who can see the sky in his mind is this monk Nadī Kāśyapa. The one who can still his mind is this monk Gaya Kāśyapa.”
158. The Bhagavān then broadly shared the subtle teaching with King Śuddhodana. After the King heard the teaching, he rose from his seat to bow his head at the Bhagavān’s feet and then withdrew and departed.
159. Then, the bhikkhus and King Śuddhodana who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
End of Fascicle 15

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.618a27-24b11]. Partial parallels include [MN 26], [SN 56.11], and [Khandhaka 1 of the Theravāda Vinaya]. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 20 March 2025


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea24.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[DA1]], [[EA19.1]], [[EA24.5]], [[EA38.4]], [[EA48.4]], [[MA204]], [[MA101]], [[DA20]], [[DA21]], [[DA22]], [[EA31.8]], [[EA19.2]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DHP\|DHP183]], [[DA1]], [[EA48.4]], [[SN12.65]], [[MN85]], [[PLI-TV-KD15]], [[SN6.1]], [[MA204]], [[MN100]], [[MN26]], [[MN36]], [[EA38.4]], [[PE2]], [[DHP\|DHP184]], [[DHP\|DHP185]], [[UD4.6]], [[ITI38]], [[PLI-TV-KD1]], [[SN11.17]], [[EA19.1]], [[EA24.5]], [[SN12.4]], [[AN4.255]], [[DN14]], [[DHP\|DHP353]], [[MN20]], [[MN4]], [[MA101]], [[EA31.8]], [[DA20]], [[DA21]], [[DA22]], [[PLI-TV-KD17]], [[EA19.2]], [[SN56.11]], [[SN56.12]], [[PLI-TV-KD1]], [[PLI-TV-KD15]], [[AN4.114]], [[AN4.157]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN5.140]], [[AN5.251-253]], [[DN22]], [[KP1]], [[MN125]], [[MN2]], [[SN12.1]], [[SN22.59]], [[SN22.61]], [[SN35.28]], [[SN4.15]], [[SN4.25]], [[SN4.4]], [[SN4.5]], [[UD1.1]], [[UD1.2]], [[UD1.3]], [[UD1.4]], [[UD2.1]], [[PLI-TV-BI-VB-PC71]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PC65]], [[PLI-TV-KD16]], [[PLI-TV-KD18]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA24]]  / 🌐 [[EA24.5]]
> ◄  [[ea19.2-patton]] 📜  [[ea24.6-patton]] ►
