---
sutta_code: "EA40.2"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 40.2 "
  - "Varṣākāra"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA40]]  / 🌐 [[EA40.2]]
> ◄  [[ea39.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea43.7-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 40: The Seven Suns

2. Varṣākāra
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was staying at the Squirrels’ Bamboo Park of Rājagṛha. He was accompanied by a great assembly of five hundred bhikkhus.
2. It was then that the King of Magadha Ajātaśatru made this statement at a meeting with his ministers, “The country of Vṛji is flourishing so much, and its people are populous. I will attack and annex that land!”
3. King Ajātaśatru then addressed the brahmin Varṣākāra, “Now, go to the Bhagavān in the name of my family. Go there and exchange greetings with the Bhagavān, bow to him, and then deliver this message, ‘King Ajātaśatru says to the Bhagavān, “I am thinking about attacking the country of the Vṛji. Would that be advisable?”’ Whatever the Tathāgata says, remember it well and then come back and tell it to me. Why is that? The Tathāgata’s statements are never duplicitous.”
4. That brahmin accepted the King’s instructions and went to the Bhagavān. They exchanged greetings, and he sat to one side. Then, the brahmin said to the Buddha, “King Ajātaśatru bows to the Bhagavān and sends his regards and greetings. He also has this to ask, ‘I am thinking about attacking the great country of the Vṛji.’ Before doing so, he asks the Buddha, ‘Would that would be advisable?’”
5. That brahmin’s robe covered him from head to toe, he wore sandals made from elephant tusks, and he had a sharp sword hanging at his side, all of which was inappropriate for discussing Dharma.<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2]
6. The Bhagavān then addressed Ānanda: “If the Vṛji people cultivate seven things, they will never be destroyed by an outside invader. What are the seven? If the people of Vṛji were to all assemble in one place and not disperse themselves, then they won’t be destroyed by another country. This is called the first way of not being conquered by an outside invader.<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3]
7. “Furthermore, Ānanda, if people of high and low positions in Vṛji are in harmony, they won’t be destroyed by an outside invader. This, Ānanda, is called the second way of not being conquered by an outside invader.<a id="fnref4"></a>[^4]
8. “Furthermore, Ānanda, if the people of Vṛji don’t lust after others and aren’t attached to a woman’s form, [they won’t be destroyed by an outside invader.] This is called the third way of not being conquered by an outside invader.<a id="fnref5"></a>[^5]
9. “Furthermore, Ānanda, if the Vṛji don’t convey what happens here to others elsewhere nor convey to those here what happens elsewhere, [they won’t be destroyed by an outside invader.] This is called the fourth way of not being conquered by an outside invader.<a id="fnref6"></a>[^6]
10. “Furthermore, Ānanda, if the people of Vṛji offer support to ascetics and brahmins, doing their duty, honoring, and respecting those of the religious life, [they won’t be destroyed by an outside invader.] This is called the fifth way of not being conquered by an outside invader.<a id="fnref7"></a>[^7]
11. “Furthermore, Ānanda, if the people of Vṛji do not covet the wealth of others, [they won’t be destroyed by an outside invader.] This is called the sixth way of not being conquered by an outside invader.<a id="fnref8"></a>[^8]
12. “Furthermore, Ānanda, if the people of Vṛji are all of the same mind, don’t go against the spirits and shrines, and are focused in thought, then they won’t be destroyed by an outside invader. This is called the seventh way of not being conquered by an outside invader.<a id="fnref9"></a>[^9] These, Ānanda, are the seven things that the people of Vṛji cultivate such that they will never be destroyed by outsiders.”
13. The brahmin then said to the Buddha, “Even if these people accomplished one of those things, they would still be undefeatable. How could they be destroyed if it were all seven? Stop, Bhagavān, stop! I have many duties of state. I will stop and return to them.” The brahmin then rose from his seat and departed.
14. That brahmin had not gone far when the Bhagavān addressed the bhikkhus, “Now, I will teach seven ways to not retreat. All of you, listen closely and consider it well.”
The bhikkhus said to the Buddha, “Very well, Bhagavān!” The bhikkhus then accepted the Buddha’s teaching.
15. The Bhagavān told them, “What are the seven ways to not retreat? bhikkhus, you should know, if the bhikkhus assemble together in one place, they are in harmony with each other, and those in higher and lower positions are respectful of each other, they will make progress higher, cultivate skillful qualities without retreating, and won’t be taken advantage of by Māra. This is called the first way to not retreat.<a id="fnref10"></a>[^10]
16. “Furthermore, if the Saṅgha is united and follows their teachings, they will make progress higher, [cultivate skillful qualities] without retreating, and won’t be taken advantage of by Māra. This is called the second way to not retreat.<a id="fnref11"></a>[^11]
17. “Furthermore, if the bhikkhus aren’t attached to work and don’t cultivate worldly toil, they will make progress higher[, cultivate skillful qualities without retreating,] and won’t be taken advantage of by Māra. This is called the third way to not retreat.<a id="fnref12"></a>[^12]
18. “Furthermore, if the bhikkhus don’t recite a mixture of texts and employ their own minds the whole day, they will make progress higher[, cultivate skillful qualities without retreating,] and won’t be taken advantage of by Māra. This is called the fourth way to not retreat.<a id="fnref13"></a>[^13]
19. “Furthermore, if the bhikkhus diligently cultivate their Dharma, rid themselves of sleepiness, and continuously guard their wakefulness, they will make progress higher[, cultivate skillful qualities without retreating,] and won’t be taken advantage of by Māra. This is called the fifth way to not retreat.<a id="fnref14"></a>[^14]
20. “Furthermore, if the bhikkhus don’t train in mathematics nor make other people study that subject and enjoy secluded places to cultivate their Dharma, they will make progress higher[, cultivate skillful qualities without retreating,] and won’t be taken advantage of by Māra. This is called the sixth way to not retreat.<a id="fnref15"></a>[^15]
21. “Furthermore, if the bhikkhus have the idea that the whole world is unpleasant, they all practice meditation, and they teach the acceptance of things, they will making progress higher[, cultivate skillful qualities without retreating,] and won’t be taken advantage of by Māra. This is called the seventh way to not retreat.<a id="fnref16"></a>[^16] If there are bhikkhus who accomplish these seven things and are in harmony with each other, then Māra won’t take advantage of them.”
22. The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:
- “Rid yourselves of duties and work    
    And don’t be confused in your thinking.    
    Those who don’t do these things    
    Still won’t gain _samādhi_.
- Those who enjoy the Dharma    
    Will discern the Dharma’s meaning.    
    Those bhikkhus who enjoy this practice    
    Will become settled in _samādhi_.
23. “Therefore, bhikkhus, you must pursue the methods that accomplish these seven things. Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”
24. When the bhikkhus who heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.738a11-c19]. Direct parallels to this _sūtra_ include [AN 7.22], [MĀ 142](../../madhyama/MA_142.html), and [Chapter 36 of Dharma Verse Stories](../../../02_avadana/dharmapada/T211/T211c36v1.html) (T211). This story serves as the introduction to most versions of the Parinirvāṇa Sūtra (cf. [DN 16], [DĀ 2](../../dirgha/DA_2.html), T5, T6, T1451, and the Sanskrit edition). The parallels in the Parinirvāṇa Sūtra are greatly expanded with a series of lists taught to the bhikkhus after Varṣākāra’s departure. Here, there is only the first list of things for the Saṅgha to practice.
    
    Generally speaking, this _sūtra_ seems to represent a fairly early version of the story, but it has developed further compared to the simplest versions found in T211 and AN 7.22. Ānanda appears in this version, but only as the person the Buddha addresses when enumerating the seven things that the Vṛji should practice. The Buddha also teaches seven practices to the community of bhikkhus after Varṣākāra leaves, as he does in the other parallels besides T211 and AN 7.22.
    
    That said, the lists in this version don’t correspond well to either the Sarvāstivāda/Theravāda parallels (MĀ 142, T1451, Sanskrit edition, AN 7.22, and DN 16) or the version found in T211, T5, and T6. It must have been from another tradition that exerted little influence on the others. Generally speaking, this version has a greater focus on practicing the religious life than the unity of the Saṅgha. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: This observation is not found in the other versions of this story. Its purpose seems to be to explain why the Buddha addresses Ānanda instead of Varṣākāra for the rest of the discourse. The same thing is accomplished in the more familiar versions of the story by having the Buddha ask Ānanda if the Vṛji were following his previous advice to them. But we should note that the simplest version (T211) does not involve Ānanda at all.
    
    This suggests that the versions involving Ānanda might be a fusion of two stories: One of Ajātaśatru sending Varṣākāra to the Buddha, and another in which the Buddha taught the seven principles to Ānanda. When the two stories were combined, a segue was needed to make the change in interlocutor more natural.
    
    Another explanation might be that some traditions held Varṣākāra in contempt for his association with Ajātaśatru and depicted the Buddha snubbing him. There are certainly other instances of this kind, such as the Buddha’s contemptuous treatment of Ānanda in the Parinirvāṇa Sūtra, which may actually be an expression of later opinions about him. [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: This first item differs from the other versions, which generally agree on holding frequent meetings. Here, the Buddha seems to be giving the Vṛji the military advice to gather all their forces into a single army. This was indeed wise counsel in ancient times when battles were generally won by the larger army. A single large force could easily defeat several smaller armies if they were disunited. [↩︎](#fnref3)

[^4]: This second item is also echoed in the other versions. However, only DĀ 2 makes specific mention of people in high and low positions being in harmony. T211 and T5 mention the people and the elite or the elite and ministers being in harmony. The Sarvāstivāda/Theravāda versions express the Vṛji unity as doing everything in unison. [↩︎](#fnref4)

[^5]: This third item is unique to this version of the list. It echoes the sentiment of item four in MĀ 142 and T1451 and five in AN 7.22/DN 16, which mention acts of violation towards women such as adultery, rape, and abduction. Here, this seems to have changed to not lusting after women, generally. [↩︎](#fnref5)

[^6]: This fourth item references divisive speech, which involves spreading rumors between groups or communities that cause conflict or mistrust between them. It doesn’t have a direct parallel in the other versions of this list. [↩︎](#fnref6)

[^7]: This fifth item is similar to the last principle in T211 and DĀ 2 in that it only mentions ascetics and brahmins rather than _arhat_s. The other versions only mention _arhat_s, which is perhaps a sign of alienation between Buddhists and other religions in later eras. [↩︎](#fnref7)

[^8]: This sixth item lacks a parallel in the other versions of the list, which advise respect for traditional shrines, spirits, and gods. [↩︎](#fnref8)

[^9]: This last principle also lacks a direct parallel in the other versions of this list. There is mention here of spirits and shrines that was found in the previous item in the other lists, but it seems out of place here. [↩︎](#fnref9)

[^10]: This first item echoes the first one in the previous list but the second item has also been merged with it. In DĀ 2 and T5, the second item remains separate from the first in the list. [↩︎](#fnref10)

[^11]: This second item has the same sentiment as we find in the Sarvāstivāda and Theravāda versions (i.e., MĀ 142, T1451, the Sanskrit edition, and DN 16), which depict the bhikkhus acting in unison as they sit, rise, and carry out their duties. Here, we get only a basic statement of their unity. [↩︎](#fnref11)

[^12]: There’s no parallel for this third item in the other versions. [↩︎](#fnref12)

[^13]: This fourth item is also unique to this version of the list. [↩︎](#fnref13)

[^14]: This fifth item most likely refers to the practice of meditating or contemplating the Dharma late into the night, and thus requires the ability to remain awake and alert. It doesn’t have a parallel in the other versions of the list. [↩︎](#fnref14)

[^15]: This sixth item is partially parallel to the sixth item in DN 16, MĀ 142, T1451, and the Sanskrit edition. The mention of mathematics is unique, however, and probably refers to the type of work that literate people often were given in ancient times: tallying ledgers, keeping records of trade, laying out building plans, and so forth, which required skill in mathematics. [↩︎](#fnref15)

[^16]: This seventh item is unique to this list. The final item in the other parallels echoes the last item in the previous list about honoring and supporting those of the religious community (or _arhat_s in particular). 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 15 July 2025


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea40.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA40.2]], [[MA142]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA40.2]], [[MA142]], [[AN7.22]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA40]]  / 🌐 [[EA40.2]]
> ◄  [[ea39.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea43.7-patton]] ►
