---
sutta_code: "EA48.4"
sutta_title:
  - "EA 48.4 "
  - "The Buddhas of the Past"
sutta-version: "Patton"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA48]]  / 🌐 [[EA48.4]]
> ◄  [[ea46.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea50.6-patton]] ►

### Translating Classical Buddhism to Modern English
### Translator: Charles Patton

## Chapter 48: The Ten Unskillful Deeds

4. The Buddhas of the Past
Fascicle 45 of the _Numerical Discourses_
Translated by the Kasmiri Tripiṭa Gautama Saṅghadeva during the Eastern Jin Dynasty (ca. 384-385 CE)
First Part of Chapter 48: Unskillful
Introduction
1. Thus I have heard:<a id="fnref1"></a>[^1] One time, the Buddha was at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
2. It was then that a group of bhikkhus gathered in the discussion hall. They each had this thought occur to them: “The present Tathāgata is extraordinary and amazing! He even knows about those who have obtained _parinirvāṇa_. He clearly discerns all of their clan names, tribes, the precepts they observed, and their followers. He knows their _samādhi_, wisdom, liberation, knowing and seeing liberation, and whether their life spans were long or short. How is it, gentlemen? Does he know their names and birthplaces by discerning the abode of principles and purifying it completely? Or do gods come to inform the Buddha about these things?”<a id="fnref2"></a>[^2]
3. The Bhagavān overheard that group of bhikkhus having this conversation using his heavenly ear. He then went to those bhikkhus and seated himself in their midst. The Bhagavān then asked the bhikkhus, “What have you gathered here to discuss? What Dharma would you like explained?”
4. The bhikkhus said to the Buddha, “We’ve gathered here to discuss the essentials of the correct Dharma. Each of us has been discussing this topic, ‘The Tathāgata is extraordinary and amazing! He even knows the epithets and clan names of past _buddha_s and _bhagavān_s and whether their wisdom was great or small. He doesn’t lack a thorough understanding of any of them, which is quite extraordinary. How is it, gentlemen? Does he know their clan names and birthplaces by discerning the realm of principles and purifying it completely? Or do gods come to inform the Buddha about these things?’”
5. The Bhagavān then asked the bhikkhus, “Would all of you like to hear about the _buddha_s of the past and their powers of spiritual knowledge? What about their clan names, epithets, and whether their life spans were long or short?”
The bhikkhus replied, “Now would be a good time. Please, Bhagavān, give us a lecture on this topic.”
6. The Buddha told the bhikkhus, “All of you, consider it well. I will give you a lecture on this topic.” That group of bhikkhus then accepted the teaching from the Buddha.
The Seven Buddhas
7. The Bhagavān told them, “bhikkhus, you should know that ninety-one eons ago, a _buddha_ appeared in the world called Tathāgata Vipaśyin the Arhat and Completely Awakened One. Furthermore, thirty-one eons ago, a _buddha_ appeared in the world called Tathāgata Śikhin the Arhat and Completely Awakened One. Also thirty-one eons ago, a _buddha_ called Tathāgata Viśvabhu [the Arhat and Completely Awakened One] appeared in the world. During this fortunate eon, a _buddha_ appeared in the world called Tathāgata Krakucchandha [the Arhat and Completely Awakened One]. Another _buddha_ appeared in the world during this fortunate eon called Tathāgata Kanakamuni the Arhat and Completely Awakened One. Another _buddha_ appeared in the world called [Tathāgata] Kāśyapa [the Arhat and Completely Awakened One]. Also, I’ve appeared in the world as Tathāgata Śākyamuni the Arhat and Completely Awakened One.”<a id="fnref3"></a>[^3]
8. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
- “In the ninety-first eon,    
    There was the Buddha Vipaśyin.    
    In the thirty-first eon,    
    Tathāgata Śikhin appeared.
- Also during that eon,    
    Tathāgata Viśvabhu appeared.    
    In the present forunate eon,    
    Four _buddha_s have also appeared:
- “Krakucchandha, Kanakamuni, and Kāśyapa,    
    Shined like the sun on the world.    
    If someone wants to know their names,    
    These were all their epithets.
Their Tribes
9. “Tathāgata Vipaśyin arose from a warrior tribe, Tathāgata Śikhin arose from a warrior tribe, and Tathāgata Viśvabhu also arose from a warrior tribe. Tathāgata Krakucchandha arose from a brahmin tribe, Tathāgata Kanakamuni arose from a brahmin tribe, and Tathāgata Kāśyapa also arose from a brahmin tribe. I’ve now likewise arisen from a warrior tribe.”<a id="fnref4"></a>[^4]
10. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
- “The first _buddha_s to appear,    
    They arose from warrior tribes.    
    Krakucchandha to Kāśyapa,    
    They arose from the brahmins.
- Being most honored and incomparable,    
    I’m now the teacher of gods and humans.    
    With these faculties serene,    
    I’ve arisen from a warrior clan.”
Their Clans
11. “Tathāgata Vipaśyin was from the Gautama clan, Tathāgata Śikhin was from the Gautama clan, and Viśvabhu was from the Gautama clan, too. Tathāgata Kāśyapa arose from the Kāśyapa clan, and Krakucchandha and Kanakamuni arose from the Kāśyapa clan, too. In the same way, I am the present Tathāgata who came from the Gautama clan.”<a id="fnref5"></a>[^5]
12. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
- “The first three _buddha_s    
    Arose from the Gautama clan.    
    The next three _buddha_s up to Kāśyapa    
    Arose from the Kāśyapa clan.
- “Now, I’m the one in the present    
    Who’s honored by gods and humans,    
    Whose faculties are serene,    
    And who arose from the Gautama clan.”
13. “bhikkhus, you should know that Tathāgata Vipaśyin was from the Kauṇḍinya clan, Tathāgata Śikhin arose from the Kauṇḍinya [clan], and Tathāgata Viśvabhu arose from the Kauṇḍinya [clan], too. Tathāgata Krakucchandha arose from the Bhāradvāja [clan], Tathāgata Kanakamuni arose from the Bhāradvāja [clan], and Tathāgata Kāśyapa arose from the Bhāradvāja [clan], too. Now, I am the Tathāgata, Arhat, and Completely Awakened One who arose from the Kauṇḍinya [clan].”
14. The Bhagavān the spoke these verses:
- “The first three _buddha_s    
    Arose from the Kauṇḍinya,    
    And the last three up to Kāśyapa    
    Arose from the Bhāradvāja.
- Now, I’m the one in the present    
    Who’s honored by gods and humans,    
    Whose faculties are serene,    
    And who arose from the Kauṇḍinya.”
Their Trees of Awakening
15. “Tathāgata Vipaśyin sat under a patali flower tree when he achieved the _buddha_ awakening. Tathāgata Śikhin sat under a mango tree when he achieved the Buddha awakening. Tathāgata Viśvabhu sat under a sal tree when he achieved the Buddha awakening. Tathāgata Krakucchandha sat under a sirisa tree when he achieved the Buddha awakening. Tathāgata Kanakamuni sat under a cluster fig tree tree when he achieved the Buddha awakening. Tathāgata Kāśyapa sat under a banyan tree when he achieved the fruit of awakening. I’m the present Tathāgata who sat under the fortune tree when he achieved the Buddha awakening.”<a id="fnref6"></a>[^6]
16. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
- “The first to achieve the _buddha_ awakening    
    Did so under a patali tree.    
    Śikhin sat under a mango tree,    
    And Viśvabhu sat at a sal tree.
- Krakucchandha sat at a sirisa tree,    
    Kanakamuni was under a cluster fig tree,    
    Kāśyapa was at a banyan tree,    
    And I achieved awakening at a fortune tree.
- Seven _buddha_s, gods among gods,    
    Illuminated the world.    
    Because they sat under these trees,    
    They achieved the fruit of awakening.
Their Congregations
17. “Tathāgata Vipaśyin had an assembly of 168,000 disciples. Tathāgata Śikhin had an assembly of 160,000 disciples. Tathāgata Viśvabhu had an assembly of 100,000 disciples. Tathāgata Krakucchandha had an assembly of 80,000 disciples. Tathāgata Kanakamuni had an assembly of 70,000 disciples. Tathāgata Kāśyapa had an assembly of 60,000 disciples. Today, I have an assembly of 1,250 disciples.<a id="fnref7"></a>[^7] They were all _arhat_s who forever ended the contaminants and had no more fetters.”
18. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
- “168,000    
    Were the disciples of Vipaśyin.    
    160,000    
    Were the disciples of Śikhin.
- 100,000 bhikkhus    
    Were the disciples of Viśvabhu.    
    Krakucchandha’s assembly was 80,000    
    And Kanakamuni had 70,000.
- Kāśyapa’s assembly was 60,000,    
    All of whom were _arhat_s.    
    Now I am Śākyamuni    
    With 1,250 disciples.
- All of them act as realized people    
    Who spread the Dharma teaching.    
    The other disciples who esteemed the Dharma    
    Were impossible to count.”
Their Attendants
19. “Tathāgata Vipaśyin’s attendant was named *Mahānāyaka. Tathāgata Śikhin’s attendant was named *Subuddhi. Tathāgata Viśvabhu’s attendant was named *Ajitasena. Tathāgata Krakucchandha’s attendant was named *Svastika. Tathāgata Kanakamuni’s attendant was named *Vīrasena. Tathāgata Kāśyapa’s attendant was named *Nāyaka. Now, my attendant is named Ānanda.”<a id="fnref8"></a>[^8]
20. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
- “*Mahānāyaka, *Subuddhi,    
    *Ajitasena, *Svastika,    
    *Vīrasena, *Nāyaka,    
    And Ānanda is the seventh.
- While they supported the sages,    
    There was nothing they didn’t gain from it.    
    They recited and maintained    
    Their doctrines without losing anything.”
Their Life Spans
21. “Tathāgata Vipaśyin had a life span of 84,000 years. Tathāgata Śikhin had a life span of 70,000 years. Tathāgata Viśvabhu had a life span of 60,000 years. Tathāgata Krakucchandha had a life span of 50,000 years. Tathāgata Kanakamuni had a life span of 40,000 years. Tathāgata Kāśyapa had a life span of 20,000 years. Today, I have a life span that has dwindled to very little. At most, I will live for a hundred years.”<a id="fnref9"></a>[^9]
22. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
- “The first _buddha_ [lived] 84,000 [years],    
    The next _buddha_ for 70,000 years,    
    Viśvabhu for 60,000,    
    And Krakucchandha for 50,000.    
    For 10,000 plus 20,000 years    
    Did Kanakamuni live,    
    And Kāśyapa lived for 20,000.    
    Only I will live for a hundred years.”
Conclusion
23. “In this way, bhikkhus, the Tathāgata observes and knows the clan names and epithets of the _buddha_s, clearly discerning them all. Regarding their tribes and birthplaces, he is fully versed. He also fully knows all of their observed precepts, wisdom, meditations, and liberation.”
24. Ānanda then said to the Buddha,<a id="fnref10"></a>[^10] “The Tathāgata also teaches that _buddha_s of the past numbering like the sands of the Gaṅgā River have obtained extinguishment, and he knows of them, too. The Tathāgata also knows about the _buddha_s of the future numbering like the sands of the Gaṅgā River who will come. Why hasn’t the Tathāgata described the works of those _buddha_s as well? But he has now described the origins and incidentals of only these seven _buddha_s.”
25. The Buddha told Ānanda, “The Tathāgata has taught the origins and incidentals of these seven _buddha_s because those origins and incidentals have their dependent arising. The _buddha_s of the past numbering like the sands of the Gaṅgā River also taught the origins and incidentals of seven _buddha_s. When Maitreya appears in the world, he will describe the origins and incidentals of seven _buddha_s, too. When the Arhat and Tathāgata Simha should arise, he will describe the origins and incidentals of seven _buddha_s. When the Buddha *Anuloma appears in the world, he will describe the origins and incidentals of seven _buddha_s. When the Buddha *Pradyota arises in the world, he will describe the origins and incidentals of seven _buddha_s. When the Buddha Vimala appears in the world, he will describe the origins and incidentals of Kāśyapa. When the Buddha *Ratnaprabha appears in the world, he will describe the origins and incidentals of Śākyamuni as well.”
26. The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
- “Simha, *Anuloma, *Pradyota,    
    Vimala, and *Ratnaprabha    
    Will all succeed Maitreya,    
    And they will achieve the Buddha awakening.
- Maitreya will describe the Buddha Śikhin,    
    Simha will describe the Buddha Viśvabhu,    
    Anuloma will describe Krakucchandha,    
    Pradyota will describe Kanakamuni,    
    And Vimala will describe Kāśyapa,    
    All teaching their ancient circumstances.
- When Ratnaprabha is completely awakened,    
    He will also describe my name.    
    The past Completely Awakened Ones    
    And those who will come in the future,    
    They will describe seven _buddha_s,    
    And their ancient origins and incidentals.”
27. “It’s only because of these circumstances that the Tathāgata describes the names of these seven _buddha_s.”
28. Ānanda then asked the Bhagavān, “What is this _sūtra_’s title, and how shall we approve of it?”
29. The Buddha told Ānanda, “This _sūtra_’s title is The Description of Buddha Names. That is how you shall remember and approve of it.”
30. Ānanda and the bhikkhus who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For the source text, cf. [T125.2.790a7-1b29]. It’s a partial parallel to [DN 14], [DĀ 1](../../dirgha/DA_1.html), [T2], and [T4]. It presents the first half of the Mahāvadāna Sūtra (DĀ 1/DN 14), which circulated as an independent _sūtra_. T4 is also an independent Seven Buddhas Sūtra that lacks the legend of Buddha Vipaśyin, while T2 is a fragment that contains part of the Vipaśyin legend.
    
    The general outline and content of this _sūtra_ agrees with its parallels, but the details are sometimes significantly different, and sometimes nearly the same. There is also some textual corruption evident, the most obvious being the repetition of the section on the clans of the seven _buddha_s. The main departure between this version and the other parallels is that it does not include sections on the parents or sons of each _buddha_. While the sons section is only found in DĀ 1, T4, and the Sanskrit edition, EĀ 48.4 is the only parallel to not include a section on their parents. [↩︎](#fnref1)

[^2]: This version has a detailed introduction that’s very similar to the one in DĀ 1, and which is lacking in DN 14. This includes the apparent reference to the Buddha accessing the _dharmadhātu_ to know about the past _buddha_s. Here, the synonym _dharmasthita_ may have been translated as 法處. I have translated as I did 法住 in [SĀ 3.14](../../samyukta/03/SA3_14.html#p4) The practical meaning of these terms is difficult to pin down, but they apparently were an attempt to express the idea of an external truth or natural law that _buddha_s discern when they awaken. In a passage below, we find 法界 serving this purpose instead of 法處. [↩︎](#fnref2)

[^3]: _Vipaśyin._ C. 毘婆尸 (EMC. bii-bua-ʃɪi = G. _vipaśi_), P. _vipassī_, S. _vipaśyin_. His name derives from the S. verb _vipaśyati_, which means “to know, perceive, discern.”
    
    _Śikhin._ C. 式詰 (EMC. sɪək-k‘iĕt = G. _śikhi_), P. _sikhī_, S. _śikhin_. The meaning of this name is unclear, but it’s usually interpreted as a kind of hair crest. It’s the name of many things in Sanskrit ranging from a mountain to the fenugreek plant.
    
    _Viśvabhu._ C. 毘舍羅婆 (EMC. bii-ʃɪe-la-bua = Pr. _viśalava_ or _viśrapa_?), G. _veṣahu_, P. _vessabhū_, S. _viśvabhu_. The second half of the C. transliteration doesn’t match any version of S. _viśvabhu_ that I can find, nor does it match the G. attestation of the name. The S. name means “in everything everywhere” and the C. glossary 翻梵語 agrees with the gloss 一切有 (“everything existing”).
    
    _Krakucchandha._ C. 拘屢孫 (EMC. kɪu-lɪu-suən = Pr. _kro’sun[dha]_?), G. _krovasudha_, P. _kakusandha_, S. _krakucchandha_. This transliteration is closer to BHS. _krakutsundha_ and the G._krovasudha_ than to the S. attestation. But, here, the second and final consonants are silent. Generally speaking, this name seems to have fallen into obscurity, leading to the various pronunciations that we see in different sources. The glossary 翻梵語 claims that it means 領持 (“neck holder”). This suggests something like S. _kṛka_ (“neck”) + _sandha_ (“holding”). This might refer to the neck of a stone column rather than a person’s throat. The Tibetan tradition instead interprets his name as meaning “destroyer of _saṃsāra_” (Edgerton 196), and the C. glossary 一切經音義 gives a similar reading of “having ended what ought to be ended” (所應斷已斷).
    
    _Kanakamuni._ C. 拘那含牟尼 (EMC. kɪu-na-ɦəm-mɪəu-nei = Pr. _konahamuni_), G. _konagamuni_ or _konag̱amuni_, P. _koṇāgamana_, S. _kanakamuni_. Here, the _-g-_ has weakened to an _-h-_ sound (technically, a “pharyngeal voiced fricative”). The S. name lit. means “sage of the Indian rose chestnut tree” or “the golden sage.” The P. name, if we derive it from _koṇa_ + _āgamana_, might mean “the end of arriving” (i.e., rebirth). His name also seems to have become obscure, leading to divergent readings.
    
    _Kāśyapa._ C. 迦葉 (EMC. kă-ʃɪɛp = Pr. _kaśap[a]_), G. _kaśava_, P. _kassapa_ , S. _kāśyapa_. This was a common translit. for Pr. _kaśapa_ (S. _kāśyapa_) throughout C. translations. Kāśyapa was a well known name of one of the old brahmin clans and an ancient brahmin sage. The name itself may have originally referred to a type of fish or deer.
    
    _Śākyamuni._ C. 釋迦文 (EMC. ʃɪɛk-kă-mɪuən = Pr. _śakamun[i]_), G. _śakamuni_, P. _sakyamunī_, S. _śākyamuni_. The Pali equiv. for this term seems to be a later S. loan word. In DN 14, the Buddha refers to himself simply as “I.” The name itself meant “the sage of the Śākya tribe” and became a common epithet of the Buddha in India. [↩︎](#fnref3)

[^4]: All of the parallels for this passage agree on these details. I’ve chosen to translate 種 as tribe here, as I believe there was more than a caste distinction being made in early Buddhist sources when warriors were contrasted with brahmins. [↩︎](#fnref4)

[^5]: This and the next section of this _sūtra_ seem to be a corruption of the original text since they contradict each other. The other parallels are in agreement that the first three _buddha_s were from the Kauṇḍinya clan, the next three were from the Kāśyapa clan, and the last was from the Gautama clan. Without more information, it’s difficult to explain how we end up with these two accounts in the present text, other than perhaps they were meant to represent both their paternal and maternal clans. [↩︎](#fnref5)

[^6]: All the parallels that include this section are in agreement on the _bodhi_ trees of the six _buddha_s of the past. For Gautama’s _bodhi_ tree, there are differences in the epithets used for the sacred fig tree, which inject some uncertainty as to whether they all refer to the same type of tree or not. Given the agreement regarding the other trees, though, it’s difficult to doubt that they weren’t in agreement on the Buddha’s _bodhi_ tree. Below are my notes on the trees listed here in this version:
    
    _patali flower tree._ C. 波羅利華樹 (EMC. pua-la-lɪi flower tree = G. _palaḍi_ flower tree), P. _pāṭali_, S. _pāṭali_ . The G. form of this word could be pronounced with an -_rd_- sound (IPA ɽ), which may explain the C. transliteration. This translit. is also found in SĀ and MĀ (eg. at [T26.1.802a12] and [T99.2.108a4]), indicating that 波羅利 was a common Pr. reading for S. _pāṭali_. It may be that the P. reading was borrowed from the S. tradition. This tree (_Stereospermum tetragonum_) is commonly called the yellow snake or trumpet flower tree.
    
    _mango tree._ C. 分陀利樹 (EMC. pɪuən-da-lɪi = G. _puṃḍari[ga]_ tree), P. _puṇḍarīka_, S. _puṇḍarīka_. This refers to the Indian mango tree (_Mangifera indica_), so named for it’s yellow-white flowers. It was native to Northeast India before it was cultivated in Southeast Asia and elsewhere.
    
    _sal tree._ C. 波羅樹 (EMC. pua-la tree = Pr. _śāla_?), G. _śala_, P. _sala_, S. _śāla_. I am assuming that 波 is an error for 娑 (EMC sa) and that the original reading was S. _śāla_. Or, perhaps _vāla_ was a variant pronunciation. Either way, I’ve translated it as S. _śāla_ given that this list agrees with the parallels otherwise. Today, this tree is commonly called the sal tree (_Shorea robusta_). It was a native tree to the Indian subcontinent going back at least 50 million years according to the fossil record. It grows quite large, reaching 130 feet tall.
    
    _sirisa tree._ C. 尸利沙樹 (EMC. ʃɪi-lɪi-ṣă = Pr. _śiriṣa_?), P. _sirīsa_, S. _śirīṣa_. This tree (_Albizia lebbeck_) is still sometimes called the sirisa tree in modern times but also the lebbeck or frywood tree. It has white flowers and long seed pod fruit.
    
    _cluster fig tree._ C. 優頭跋羅樹 (EMC. ɪəu-dəu-buat-la tree = Pr. _uduṃbara_ tree), G. _uduṃbara_, P. _udumbara_, S. _udumbara_. This is the cluster fig tree (_Ficus racemosa_). This tree was widespread throughout tropical Asia including India. It’s a small tree that grows large clusters of figs near its trunk.
    
    _banyan tree._ C. 尼拘留樹 (EMC. ṇɪi-kɪu-lɪəu = Pr. _nigro[dha]_ or _nigoro[dha]_?), G. _?_, P. _nigrodha_, S. _nigrodha_. This is the Indian banyan tree (_Ficus benghalensis_), which is another variety of fig tree. It’s a large tree well known for its broad canopy and aerial roots. Considered sacred by many Indian traditions, temples are often located near stands of banyan trees.
    
    _fortune tree._ C. 吉祥樹. This last tree’s name is translated into Chinese as 吉祥 (“good fortune, auspicious”). This must have been a gloss of the _bodhi_ tree’s name. In any case, it’s difficult to imagine that this was not intended to mean the sacred fig tree (_Ficus religiosa_). This is another large tree that reaches a hundred feet in height with a trunk up to ten feet in diameter. [↩︎](#fnref6)

[^7]: These figures for the congregations of each _buddha_ are somewhat different than the other parallels. First, Vipaśyin, Śikhin, and Viśvabhu have one congregation each, while they have two or three congregations in the other versions. The numbers for these congregations still decrease by ten or twenty thousand each, which results in higher numbers for the last three of the past _buddha_s: eighty to sixty thousand rather than forty to twenty thousand.
    
    One curiosity, however, is that this version agrees with DĀ 1 in that Vipaśyin had a congregation of 168,000, where the other versions all have smaller figures (except DN 14, which has corrupted the figure to 6.2 million).
    
    Judging by a pattern across several parallels, it would seem that the original figure was 62 or 68,000 for Vipaśyin. A congregation of 62,000 is cited in five different passages across the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya (T1443.23.915c19, T1448.24.83c16, T1450.24.187b18, T1451.24.215c26, 260c18, 278b27), as well as a passage that cites 80,000 and another that cites 84,000 (T1448.24.96a18 and 48b13, respectively). The 62,000 figure agrees with T2. The Sanskrit parallel has apparently corrupted 62,000 to 6.2 million in the same way that DN 14 has inflated its own figure. My overall impression is that he probably had a single smaller congregation in the earliest stories, which has been enlarged for the _Mahāvadāna Sūtra_ by increasing the number beyond 100,000, adding more congregations, or both.
    
    This evidence regarding Vipaśyin’s congregation suggests that the first three past _buddha_s probably had only one congregation each initially, as we find here in EĀ 48.4, but their numbers have been increased. This still leaves this version closer to the early stories than the other parallels in this regard. [↩︎](#fnref7)

[^8]: This list of attendant disciples is significantly different from the lists found in the other parallels. The other parallels generally agree with each other, however, leaving us with a situation that’s difficult to explain. It could be that this section was added independently, causing the names to be chosen differently or placed in a different order. This isn’t implausible to me given that the parallels don’t share all the same details about the seven _buddha_s. The _sūtra_ seems to have grown as more details were added over time, which is represented in the extant versions.
    
    One thing that is interesting, though, is that all the other parallels begin with Aśoka as the name of Vipaśyin’s attendant. Taken at face value, this would seem to indicate that they date back to the reign of King Aśoka (268-232 BCE) or the period immediately after, when he became famous as a benefactor of the Saṅgha in India. His name does not occur here, but there a couple names shared with the other parallels (i.e., Subuddhi and Svastika).
    
    In any case, my notes on each name is listed below. For the most part, they’ve been translated to C., which makes determining exact S. equivalents uncertain when there are multiple possibilities of similar meaning. I’ve listed the names found in DN 14 and the Sanskrit edition for comparison.
    
    _*Mahānāyaka._ C. 大導師, P. _asoka_, S. _aśoka_. This name means “great guide” or “leader.” Another possible S. equivalent is _*mahasārthavāha_, which would mean “great caravan leader,” referring to the leader of a long distance trade caravan.
    
    _*Subuddhi._ C. 善覺, P. _khemaṅkara_, S. _kṣemakāra_. This name lit. means “good perception” or “realization.” The same name occurs in DĀ 1 as Krakucchanda’s attendant.
    
    _*Ajitasena._ C. 勝眾, P. _upasanta_, S. _upaśānta_. The C. lit. means “victorious assembly.” S. _ajitasena_ lit. means “unconquered army” and is an attested name for a householder in S. sources (Edgerton 7). There are other possibilities, but they are as speculative as this one.
    
    _*Svastika._ C. 吉祥, P. _buddhija_, S. _bhadrika_. The C. lit. means “good fortune, auspicious,” which matches the basic meaning of S. _svastika_ (P. _sotthika_). This name is attested in the Sanskrit parallel for Kanakamuni’s attendant.
    
    _*Vīrasena._ C. 毘羅先 (EMC. bii-la-sen = Pr. _virasen[a]_?), P. _sotthija_, S. _svastika_. This is the only straightforward S. equiv. for the C. transliteration that I have found to be attested as a personal name (cf. Edgerton 506). It lit. means “having an army of heroes.”
    
    _*Nāyaka._ C. 導師, P. _sabbamitta_, S. _sarvamitra_. This name is the same as the first, minus the “great” (P/S. _mahā-_). It means “guide, leader.”
    
    _Ānanda._ C. 阿難 (EMC. •a-nan = Pr. _anan[da]_), P. _ānanda_, S. _ānanda_. This name lit. means “happiness, delight, joy.” [↩︎](#fnref8)

[^9]: All of the parallels are in agreement that the life spans of the _buddha_s ranged from 80,000 years to 20,000, decreasing by 10,000 years each. This version, however, differs from the othe parallels in that it skips 30,000 years rather than 50,000. It also cites 84,000 years as Vipaśyin’s life span instead of 80,000. [↩︎](#fnref9)

[^10]: This conclusion is unique to this version of the _sūtra_, which seems to be a brief commentary acknowledging the existence of many more past and future _buddha_s than seven. The lineage of seven _buddha_s described here is reminescent of the histories of tribal peoples that often go back a certain number of generations. The Buddha (or Buddhist commentator) here says that every _buddha_ traces his lineage back through the six previous _buddha_s, even though there are actually many more that have existed. 
    

---

Translator: Charles Patton

Last Revised: 22 October 2025


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ea48.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[DA1]], [[EA19.1]], [[EA24.5]], [[EA38.4]], [[EA48.4]], [[MA204]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DHP\|DHP183]], [[DA1]], [[EA48.4]], [[SN12.65]], [[MN85]], [[PLI-TV-KD15]], [[SN6.1]], [[MA204]], [[MN100]], [[MN26]], [[MN36]], [[EA38.4]], [[PE2]], [[DHP\|DHP184]], [[DHP\|DHP185]], [[UD4.6]], [[ITI38]], [[PLI-TV-KD1]], [[SN11.17]], [[EA19.1]], [[EA24.5]], [[SN12.4]], [[DN14]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[EA]] / 📂 [[EA48]]  / 🌐 [[EA48.4]]
> ◄  [[ea46.4-patton]] 📜  [[ea50.6-patton]] ►
