---
sutta_code: "SN51.33"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.33]]
> ◄  [[sn51.32-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.45-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 51. Iddhipādasaṁyutta: On the Bases of Psychic Power

### IV. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges — SN51.33-44: Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the four bases of psychic power slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a bhikkhu who develops the four bases of psychic power slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … energy … mental development … inquiry, and active effort.


2In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the four bases of psychic power slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

To be expanded for each of the different rivers as in SN45.91-102.


3Six on slanting to the east,  
and six on slanting to the ocean;  
these two sixes make twelve,  
and that’s how this chapter is recited.

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro iddhipāde bhāvento cattāro iddhipāde bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro iddhipāde bhāvento cattāro iddhipāde bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṁ iddhi pāda ṁ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhi … pe … cittasamādhi … vīmaṁsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṁ iddhi pāda ṁ bhāveti.


2Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cattāro iddhipāde bhāvento cattāro iddhipāde bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro"ti.

Dvādasamaṁ.

Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo catuttho.


3Cha pācīnato ninnā,  
cha ninnā ca samuddato;  
Dvete cha dvādasa honti,  
vaggo tena pavuccatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.33-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.33]]
> ◄  [[sn51.32-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.45-sujato-pali]] ►
