---
sutta_code: "SN51.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Viraddhasutta "
  - "Neglected"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.2]]
> ◄  [[sn51.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.3-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 51. Iddhipādasaṁyutta: On the Bases of Psychic Power

### I. At the Cāpāla Shrine — SN51.2: Missed Out
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, whoever has missed out on the four bases of psychic power has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. Whoever has undertaken the four bases of psychic power has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.

What four? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … energy … mental development … inquiry, and active effort.

Whoever has missed out on these four bases of psychic power has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. Whoever has undertaken these four bases of psychic power has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.”

1"Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṁ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, cattāro iddhipādā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṁ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī.

Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṁ iddhi pāda ṁ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhi … pe … cittasamādhi … pe … vīmaṁsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṁ iddhi pāda ṁ bhāveti.

Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime cattāro iddhipādā viraddhā, viraddho tesaṁ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī. Yesaṁ kesañci, bhikkhave, ime cattāro iddhipādā āraddhā, āraddho tesaṁ ariyo maggo sammā dukkhakkhayagāmī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 254 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.2]]
> ◄  [[sn51.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn51.3-sujato-pali]] ►
