---
sutta_code: "SN50.55"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.55]]
> ◄  [[sn50.45-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn50.67-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 50. Balasaṁyutta: On the Five Powers

## 50. Balasaṁyutta: On the Five Powers

### VI. Another Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges, Etc. — SN50.55-66: Another Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the five powers slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a bhikkhu who develops the five powers slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

That’s how a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the five powers slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

To be expanded for each of the different rivers as in SN45.91-102, removal of greed version.

2Six on slanting to the east,  
and six on slanting to the ocean;  
these two sixes make twelve,  
and that’s how this chapter is recited.

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañca balāni bhāvento pañca balāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañca balāni bhāvento pañca balāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu, saddhābalaṁ bhāveti rāgavinayapariyosānaṁ dosavinayapariyosānaṁ mohavinayapariyosānaṁ …

… evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañca balāni bhāvento pañca balāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro"ti. Vitthāretabbā.

Dvādasamaṁ.

Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo chaṭṭho.

2Cha pācīnato ninnā,  
cha ninnā ca samuddato;  
Dvete cha dvādasa honti,

[[SN50.45-54#content]][[sn50.67-76#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn50.55-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.55]]
> ◄  [[sn50.45-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn50.67-sujato-pali]] ►
