---
sutta_code: "SN50.1"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn50.13-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

#### Links
---
Sutta Overview: [[SN50.1]] 
Nikaya: [[SN]] [[sn-sujato-pali]]
Adjacent Suttas: [[sn50.2-sujato-pali]]
Division: [[SN50]] , [[sn50-sujato-pali]]

---

## 50. Balasaṁyutta: On the Five Powers

### I. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges — SN50.1-12: Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five powers. The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the five powers slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a bhikkhu who develops the five powers slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

That’s how a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the five powers slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”


To be expanded for each of the different rivers as in SN45.91-102.

2Six on slanting to the east,  
and six on slanting to the ocean;  
these two sixes make twelve,  
and that’s how this chapter is recited.

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, balāni. Katamāni pañca? Saddhābalaṁ, vīriyabalaṁ, satibalaṁ, samādhibalaṁ, paññābalaṁ – imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca balānīti.

Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañca balāni bhāvento pañca balāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañca balāni bhāvento pañca balāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddhābalaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ, vīriyabalaṁ … pe … satibalaṁ … samādhibalaṁ … paññābalaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañca balāni bhāvento pañca balāni bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro"ti.


Dvādasamaṁ.

Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo paṭhamo.

2Cha pācīnato ninnā,  
cha ninnā ca samuddato;  
Dvete cha dvādasa honti,  
vaggo tena pavuccatīti.

[[sn50#content]][[Clean links 2/Bodhi epubs/Imported/SN Bodhi 3/SN50/SN50.13-22#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn50.1-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn50.13-sujato-pali]] ►
