---
sutta_code: "SN50.99"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.99]]
> ◄  [[sn50.89-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

## 50. Balasaṁyutta: On the Five Powers

### IX. Another Chapter on Floods — SN50.99-108: Another Series on Floods
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five higher fetters.

The five powers should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters. What five? A bhikkhu develops the powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

These five powers should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.”

To be expanded as in SN45.171-179, with the above as the final discourse.

2Floods, bonds, grasping,  
ties, and underlying tendencies,  
kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,  
aggregates, and fetters high and low.

“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, uddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni. Katamāni pañca? Rūparāgo, arūparāgo, māno, uddhaccaṁ avijjā — imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ uddhambhāgiyānaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya pañca balāni bhāvetabbāni. Katamāni pañca? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddhābalaṁ bhāveti … pe … paññābalaṁ bhāveti rāgavinayapariyosānaṁ dosavinayapariyosānaṁ mohavinayapariyosānaṁ.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ uddhambhāgiyānaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya imāni pañca balāni bhāvetabbānī”ti.

Dasamaṁ.

Oghavaggo dasamo.

Tassuddānaṁ

2Ogho yogo upādānaṁ,  
ganthā anusayena ca;  
Kāmaguṇā nīvaraṇā,  
khandhā oruddhambhāgiyāti.

Balasaṁyuttaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.

[[sn50.89-98#content]][[sn51#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn50.99-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.99]]
> ◄  [[sn50.89-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
