---
sutta_code: "SN37.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Tīhidhammehisutta "
  - "Three Qualities"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN37]]  / 🌐 [[SN37.4]]
> ◄  [[sn37.3-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn37.5-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 37.4 Tīhidhammehisuttaṃ

## SN 37.4 The Discourse on Three Qualities

283. ‘‘Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo yebhuyyena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati. Katamehi tīhi? Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo pubbaṇhasamayaṃ maccheramalapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati. Majjhanhikasamayaṃ issāpariyuṭṭhitena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati. Sāyanhasamayaṃ kāmarāgapariyuṭṭhitena cetasā agāraṃ ajjhāvasati. Imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo yebhuyyena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjatī’’ti. Catutthaṃ.

283."bhikkhus, a woman endowed with three qualities, upon the breakup of the body, after death, is for the most part reborn in a state of deprivation, a bad destination, the lower realms, hell. What three? Here, bhikkhus, a woman dwells at home in the morning with a mind overcome by the taint of stinginess. At midday, she dwells at home with a mind overcome by envy. In the evening, she dwells at home with a mind overcome by sensual lust. bhikkhus, a woman endowed with these three qualities, upon the breakup of the body, after death, is for the most part reborn in a state of deprivation, a bad destination, the lower realms, hell." The fourth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn37.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 240 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN37]]  / 🌐 [[SN37.4]]
> ◄  [[sn37.3-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn37.5-deepseek-pali]] ►
