---
sutta_code: "SN54.15"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamabhikkhusutta "
  - "Bhikkhus (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.15]]
> ◄  [[sn54.14-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn54.16-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 54. Ānāpānasaṁyutta: On Breath Meditation

### II. The Second Chapter — SN54.15: Several bhikkhus (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then several bhikkhus went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Sir, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills four things; and those four things, when developed and cultivated, fulfill seven things; and those seven things, when developed and cultivated, fulfill two things?”

“There is, bhikkhus.”


2“Sir, what is that one thing?”


“Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and freedom.


3And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? …

That’s how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill knowledge and freedom.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu. Ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ:

"atthi nu kho, bhante, ekadhammo bhāvito bahulīkato cattāro dhamme paripūreti, cattāro dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta dhamme paripūrenti, satta dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā dve dhamme paripūrentī"ti?

"Atthi kho, bhikkhave, ekadhammo bhāvito bahulīkato cattāro dhamme paripūreti, cattāro dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta dhamme paripūrenti, satta dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā dve dhamme paripūrentī"ti.


2"Katamo pana, bhante, ekadhammo bhāvito bahulīkato cattāro dhamme paripūreti, cattāro dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta dhamme paripūrenti, satta dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā dve dhamme paripūrentī"ti?


"Ānāpānassatisamādhi kho, bhikkhave, ekadhammo bhāvito bahulīkato cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūreti, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrenti, satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṁ paripūrentīti.


3Kathaṁ bhāvito ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassatisamādhi kathaṁ bahulīkato cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūreti?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā … pe … evaṁ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṁ bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṁ paripūrentī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn54.15-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA803]], [[SA810-812]], [[SA815]] | S v 334 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN118]], [[SA815]], [[SA803]], [[SA810-812]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.10]], [[MN44]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.15]]
> ◄  [[sn54.14-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn54.16-sujato-pali]] ►
