---
sutta_code: "SN30.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Dvayakārīsutta "
  - "Both Kinds of Deeds"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN30]]  / 🌐 [[SN30.3]]
> ◄  [[sn30.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn30.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 30. Supaṇṇasaṁyutta: On Phoenixes

### I. Phoenixes — SN30.3: Both Kinds of Deeds
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes?”


“bhikkhu, it’s when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. And they’ve heard: ‘The egg-born phoenixes are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ They think: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes!’ When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes.

This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ supaṇṇānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti?


"Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena dvayakārī hoti, vācāya dvayakārī, manasā dvayakārī. Tassa sutaṁ hoti: ‘aṇḍajā supaṇṇā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. Tassa evaṁ hoti: ‘aho vatāhaṁ kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ supaṇṇānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyyan’ti. So kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ supaṇṇānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjati.

Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ supaṇṇānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn30.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 247 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN30]]  / 🌐 [[SN30.3]]
> ◄  [[sn30.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn30.4-sujato-pali]] ►
