---
sutta_code: "SN30.7"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN30.7]]
> ◄  [[sn30.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn30.17-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 30. Supaṇṇasaṁyutta: On Phoenixes

### I. Phoenixes — SN30.7-16: Ten Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become Egg-Born
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes?”

“bhikkhu, it’s when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. And they’ve heard: ‘The egg-born phoenixes are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ They think: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes!’ They give food … drink … clothing … a vehicle … a garland … fragrance … makeup … a bed … a house … a lamp. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes.

This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born phoenixes.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ supaṇṇānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti?

"Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena dvayakārī hoti, vācāya dvayakārī, manasā dvayakārī. Tassa sutaṁ hoti: ‘aṇḍajā supaṇṇā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. Tassa evaṁ hoti: ‘aho vatāhaṁ kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ supaṇṇānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyyan’ti. So annaṁ deti … pe … pānaṁ deti … vatthaṁ deti … yānaṁ deti … mālaṁ deti … gandhaṁ deti … vilepanaṁ deti … seyyaṁ deti … āvasathaṁ deti … padīpeyyaṁ deti. So kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ supaṇṇānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjati.

Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ supaṇṇānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti.

Soḷasamaṁ.

[[Clean Files 3/Bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN22-34/SN30/SN30.1-10/SN30.4-6#content]][[Clean Files 3/Bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN22-34/SN30/SN30.11-20/SN30.17-46#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn30.7-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN30.7]]
> ◄  [[sn30.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn30.17-sujato-pali]] ►
