---
sutta_code: "SN17.13"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN17.13]]
> ◄  [[sn17.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn17.21-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## SN17: Linked Discourses on Possessions, Honour, and Popularity

### II. The Second Chapter — SN17.13-20: A Gold Coin, Etc.
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, when I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain person, I understand: ‘This venerable would not tell a deliberate lie even for the sake of a gold coin.’ …


‘… for the sake of a hundred gold coins.’ …

‘… for the sake of a gold doubloon.’ …

‘… for the sake of a hundred gold doubloons.’ …

‘… for the sake of the whole earth full of gold.’ …

‘… for any kind of material reward.’ …

‘… for the sake of life.’ …

‘… for the sake of the finest lady in the land.’ But some time later I see them tell a deliberate lie because their mind is overcome and overwhelmed by possessions, honor, and popularity.

So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity. …”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

""Idhāhaṁ, bhikkhave, ekaccaṁ puggalaṁ evaṁ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi: ‘Na cāyamāyasmā suvaṇṇanikkhassāpi hetu


… pe … suvaṇṇanikkhasatassāpi hetu

… siṅgīnikkhassāpi hetu

… siṅgīnikkhasatassāpi hetu

… pathaviyāpi jātarūpaparipūrāya hetu

… āmisakiñcikkhahetupi

… jīvitahetupi

… janapadakalyāṇiyāpi hetu sampajānamusā bhāseyyā’ti. Tamenaṁ passāmi aparena samayena lābhasakkārasilokena abhibhūtaṁ pariyādiṇṇacittaṁ sampajānamusā bhāsantaṁ.

Evaṁ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Dutiyo vaggo.

2Dve pāti dve suvaṇṇā ca,  
Siṅgīhi apare duve;  
Pathavī kiñcikkhajīvitaṁ,  
Janapadakalyāṇiyā dasāti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn17.13-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN17.13]]
> ◄  [[sn17.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn17.21-sujato-pali]] ►
