---
sutta_code: "SN17.36"
sutta_title:
  - "Pañcarathasatasutta "
  - "Five Hundred Carts"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN17]]  / 🌐 [[SN17.36]]
> ◄  [[sn17.35-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn17.37-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## SN17: Linked Discourses on Possessions, Honour, and Popularity

### III. The Fourth Chapter — SN17.36: Five Hundred Carts
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

Now at that time Prince Ajātasattu was going with five hundred carts in the morning and the evening to attend on Devadatta, presenting him with an offering of five hundred servings of food.

Then several bhikkhus went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: “Sir, Prince Ajātasattu is going with five hundred carts in the morning and the evening to attend on Devadatta, presenting him with an offering of five hundred servings of food.”

“bhikkhus, don’t envy Devadatta’s possessions, honor, and popularity. As long as Prince Ajātasattu goes with five hundred carts in the morning and the evening to attend on Devadatta, presenting him with an offering of five hundred servings of food, Devadatta can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities.

2If bile were to burst from a wild dog’s nose, it would become even wilder. In the same way, as long as Prince Ajātasattu goes with five hundred carts in the morning and the evening to attend on Devadatta, presenting him with an offering of five hundred servings of food, Devadatta can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities.

So brutal are possessions, honor, and popularity. …”

#### Pali

1Rājagahe vihārati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.

Tena kho pana samayena devadattassa ajātasattukumāro pañcahi rathasatehi sāyaṁ pātaṁ upaṭṭhānaṁ gacchati, pañca ca thālipākasatāni bhattābhihāro abhiharīyati.

Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu. Ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ: "Devadattassa, bhante, ajātasattukumāro pañcahi rathasatehi sāyaṁ pātaṁ upaṭṭhānaṁ gacchati, pañca ca thālipākasatāni bhattābhihāro abhiharīyatī"ti.

"Mā, bhikkhave, devadattassa lābhasakkārasilokaṁ pihayittha. Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, devadattassa ajātasattukumāro pañcahi rathasatehi sāyaṁ pātaṁ upaṭṭhānaṁ gamissati, pañca ca thālipākasatāni bhattābhihāro āharīyissati, hāniyeva, bhikkhave, devadattassa pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu, no vuddhi.

2Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, caṇḍassa kukkurassa nāsāya pittaṁ bhindeyyuṁ, evañhi so, bhikkhave, kukkuro bhiyyoso mattāya caṇḍataro assa; evameva, bhikkhave, yāvakīvañca devadattassa ajātasattukumāro pañcahi rathasatehi sāyaṁ pātaṁ upaṭṭhānaṁ gamissati, pañca ca thālipākasatāni bhattābhihāro āharīyissati, hāniyeva, bhikkhave, devadattassa pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu, no vuddhi.

Evaṁ dāruṇo kho, bhikkhave, lābhasakkārasiloko … pe … evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn17.36-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA12.7]], [[EA23.7]], [[SA-2.3]], [[SA1064]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA12.7]], [[PLI-TV-KD17]], [[SA1064]], [[AN4.68]], [[EA23.7]], [[SA-2.3]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN17]]  / 🌐 [[SN17.36]]
> ◄  [[sn17.35-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn17.37-sujato-pali]] ►
