---
sutta_code: "SN37.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Āveṇikadukkhasutta "
  - "Peculiar"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN37]]  / 🌐 [[SN37.3]]
> ◄  [[sn37.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn37.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 37. Mātugāmasaṁyutta: On Females

### I. Abbreviated Texts — SN37.3: Particular Suffering
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of suffering that particularly apply to females. They’re undergone by females and not by men. What five?

Firstly, a female, while still young, goes to live with her husband’s family and is separated from her relatives. This is the first kind of suffering that particularly applies to females.

Furthermore, a female undergoes the menstrual cycle. This is the second kind of suffering that particularly applies to females.

Furthermore, a female undergoes pregnancy. This is the third kind of suffering that particularly applies to females.

Furthermore, a female gives birth. This is the fourth kind of suffering that particularly applies to females.

Furthermore, a female provides services for a man. This is the fifth kind of suffering that particularly applies to females.

These are the five kinds of suffering that particularly apply to females. They’re undergone by females and not by men.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa āveṇikāni dukkhāni, yāni mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi. Katamāni pañca?

Idha, bhikkhave, mātugāmo daharova samāno patikulaṁ gacchati, ñātakehi vinā hoti. Idaṁ, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa paṭhamaṁ āveṇikaṁ dukkhaṁ, yaṁ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi.

Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, mātugāmo utunī hoti. Idaṁ, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa dutiyaṁ āveṇikaṁ dukkhaṁ, yaṁ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi.

Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, mātugāmo gabbhinī hoti. Idaṁ, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa tatiyaṁ āveṇikaṁ dukkhaṁ, yaṁ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi.

Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, mātugāmo vijāyati. Idaṁ, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa catutthaṁ āveṇikaṁ dukkhaṁ, yaṁ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi.

Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, mātugāmo purisassa pāricariyaṁ upeti.

Idaṁ kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa pañcamaṁ āveṇikaṁ dukkhaṁ, yaṁ mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehi. Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca mātugāmassa āveṇikāni dukkhāni, yāni mātugāmo paccanubhoti, aññatreva purisehī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn37.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 239 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN37]]  / 🌐 [[SN37.3]]
> ◄  [[sn37.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn37.4-sujato-pali]] ►
