---
sutta_code: "SN37.29"
sutta_title:
  - "Aṅgasutta "
  - "In That Respect"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN37]]  / 🌐 [[SN37.29]]
> ◄  [[sn37.28-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn37.30-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 37. Mātugāmasaṁyutta: On Females

### III. Powers — SN37.29: In That Respect
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, there are these five powers of a female. What five?

Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior.


A female who has the power of attractiveness but not the power of wealth is incomplete in that respect.

But when she has the power of attractiveness and the power of wealth she’s complete in that respect.

A female who has the powers of attractiveness and wealth, but not the power of relatives is incomplete in that respect.

But when she has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, and relatives she’s complete in that respect.

A female who has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, and relatives, but not the power of children is incomplete in that respect.

But when she has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, and children she’s complete in that respect.


A female who has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, and children, but not the power of ethical behavior is incomplete in that respect.

But when she has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior she’s complete in that respect.

These are the five powers of a female.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa balāni. Katamāni pañca?

Rūpabalaṁ, bhogabalaṁ, ñātibalaṁ, puttabalaṁ, sīlabalaṁ.


Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca bhogabalena – evaṁ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti.

Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo rūpabalena ca samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca – evaṁ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti.

Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, na ca ñātibalena – evaṁ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti.

Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo rūpabalena ca samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca – evaṁ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti.

Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca, na ca puttabalena – evaṁ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti.

Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo rūpabalena ca samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca, puttabalena ca – evaṁ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti.


Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca, puttabalena ca, na ca sīlabalena – evaṁ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti.

Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, mātugāmo rūpabalena ca samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca, puttabalena ca, sīlabalena ca – evaṁ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti.

Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca mātugāmassa balānī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn37.29-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 247 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN37]]  / 🌐 [[SN37.29]]
> ◄  [[sn37.28-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn37.30-sujato-pali]] ►
