---
sutta_code: "AN11.10"
sutta_title:
  - "Moranivāpa "
  - "At The Peacocks’ Feeding Ground"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.10]]
> ◄  [[an11.9-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an11.11-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 11: The Book of the Elevens

### I. Dependence — AN 11.10: At the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, at the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks’ feeding ground. There the Buddha addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus!”

“Venerable sir,” they replied. The Buddha said this:

2“bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who has three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. What three? The entire spectrum of an adept’s ethics, immersion, and wisdom. A bhikkhu with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans.

3A bhikkhu who has another three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. What three? A demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of revealing, and a demonstration of instruction. A bhikkhu with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans.

4A bhikkhu who has another three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. What three? Right view, right knowledge, and right freedom. A bhikkhu with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans.

5A bhikkhu who has two qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. What two? Knowledge and conduct. A bhikkhu with these two qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are best among gods and humans. Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this verse:


6‘The aristocrat is best of those people  
who take clan as the standard.  
But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct  
is best of gods and humans.’

7Now, that verse spoken by Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra is well spoken, not poorly spoken. It’s beneficial, not pointless, and I agree with it. I also say:

8‘The aristocrat is best of those people  
who take clan as the standard.  
But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct  
Is best of gods and humans.’”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā rājagahe viharati moranivāpe paribbājakārāme. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi:  "bhikkhavo"ti.

"Bhadante"ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etadavoca: 

2"Tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṁ. Katamehi tīhi? Asekhena sīlakkhandhena, asekhena samādhikkhandhena, asekhena paññākkhandhena – imehi, kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṁ.

3Aparehipi, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṁ. Katamehi tīhi? Iddhipāṭihāriyena, ādesanāpāṭihāriyena, anusāsanīpāṭihāriyena – imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti, accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṁ.

4Aparehipi, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṁ. Katamehi tīhi? Sammādiṭṭhiyā, sammāñāṇena, sammāvimuttiyā – imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṁ.

5Dvīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṁ. Katamehi dvīhi? Vijjāya, caraṇena – imehi kho, bhikkhave, dvīhi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu accantaniṭṭho hoti accantayogakkhemī accantabrahmacārī accantapariyosāno seṭṭho devamanussānaṁ.

Brahmunā pesā, bhikkhave, sanaṅkumārena gāthā bhāsitā: 


6‘Khattiyo seṭṭho janetasmiṁ,  
ye gottapaṭisārino;  
Vijjācaraṇasampanno,  
so seṭṭho devamānuse’ti.

7Sā kho panesā, bhikkhave, sanaṅkumārena gāthā bhāsitā subhāsitā, no dubbhāsitā; atthasaṁhitā, no anatthasaṁhitā; anumatā mayā. Ahampi, bhikkhave, evaṁ vadāmi: 

8‘Khattiyo seṭṭho janetasmiṁ,  
ye gottapaṭisārino;  
Vijjācaraṇasampanno,  
so seṭṭho devamānuse’"ti.

Dasamaṁ.

Nissayavaggo paṭhamo.

9Kimatthiyā cetanā tayo,  
upanisā byasanena ca;  
Dve saññā manasikāro,  
saddho moranivāpakanti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an11.10-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 326 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN3.143-145]], [[DN27]], [[DN3]], [[MN53]], [[SN21.11]], [[SN6.11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.10]]
> ◄  [[an11.9-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an11.11-sujato-pali]] ►
