---
sutta_code: "SN11.12"
sutta_title:
  - "Sakkanāmasutta "
  - "Sakka's Names"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.12]]
> ◄  [[sn11.11-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.13-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 11. Sakkasaṁyutta: With Sakka

### II. The Second Chapter — SN11.12: Sakka’s Names
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove. There the Buddha said to the bhikkhus:

“bhikkhus, in a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he was a brahmanical student named Magha. That’s why he’s called Maghavā.

2In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts in stronghold after stronghold. That’s why he’s called Purindada, the Stronghold-Giver.

3In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts carefully. That’s why he’s called Sakka, the Careful.

4In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave the gift of a guest house. That’s why he’s called Vāsava, the Houser.

5Sakka thinks of a thousand things in a moment. That’s why he’s called Sahassakkha, the Thousand-Eye.

6Sakka’s wife is the demon maiden named Sujā. That’s why he’s called Sujampati, Sujā’s Husband.

7Sakka rules as sovereign lord over the gods of the Thirty-Three. That’s why he’s called lord of gods.

8In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka. What seven?

As long as I live, may I support my parents. As long as I live, may I honor the elders in the family. As long as I live, may I speak gently. As long as I live, may I not speak divisively. As long as I live, may I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. As long as I live, may I speak the truth. As long as I live, may I be free of anger, or should anger arise, may I quickly get rid of it.

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka.

9A person who respects their parents,  
and honors the elders in the family,  
whose speech is gentle and courteous,  
and has given up divisiveness;

10who’s committed to getting rid of stinginess,  
is truthful, and has mastered anger:  
the gods of the Thirty-Three  
call them truly a good person.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ jetavane. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū etadavoca:

"sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno magho nāma māṇavo ahosi, tasmā maghavāti vuccati.

2Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno pure dānaṁ adāsi, tasmā purindadoti vuccati.

3Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno sakkaccaṁ dānaṁ adāsi, tasmā sakkoti vuccati.

4Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo pubbe manussabhūto samāno āvasathaṁ adāsi, tasmā vāsavoti vuccati.

5Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo sahassampi atthānaṁ muhuttena cinteti, tasmā sahassakkhoti vuccati.

6Sakkassa, bhikkhave, devānamindassa sujā nāma asurakaññā pajāpati, tasmā sujampatīti vuccati.

7Sakko, bhikkhave, devānamindo devānaṁ tāvatiṁsānaṁ issariyādhipaccaṁ rajjaṁ kāreti, tasmā devānamindoti vuccati.

8Sakkassa, bhikkhave, devānamindassa pubbe manussabhūtassa satta vatapadāni samattāni samādinnāni ahesuṁ, yesaṁ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṁ ajjhagā. Katamāni satta vatapadāni?

Yāvajīvaṁ mātāpettibharo assaṁ, yāvajīvaṁ kule jeṭṭhāpacāyī assaṁ, yāvajīvaṁ saṇhavāco assaṁ, yāvajīvaṁ apisuṇavāco assaṁ, yāvajīvaṁ vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṁ ajjhāvaseyyaṁ muttacāgo payatapāṇi vossaggarato yācayogo dānasaṁvibhāgarato, yāvajīvaṁ saccavāco assaṁ, yāvajīvaṁ akkodhano assaṁ – sacepi me kodho uppajjeyya, khippameva naṁ paṭivineyyanti.

Sakkassa, bhikkhave, devānamindassa pubbe manussabhūtassa imāni satta vatapadāni samattāni samādinnāni ahesuṁ, yesaṁ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṁ ajjhagāti.

9Mātāpettibharaṁ jantuṁ,  
kule jeṭṭhāpacāyinaṁ;  
Saṇhaṁ sakhilasambhāsaṁ,  
pesuṇeyyappahāyinaṁ.

10Maccheravinaye yuttaṁ,  
saccaṁ kodhābhibhuṁ naraṁ;  
Taṁ ve devā tāvatiṁsā,  
āhu sappuriso itī"ti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn11.12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.35]], [[SA1106]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.35]], [[SA1106]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.12]]
> ◄  [[sn11.11-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.13-sujato-pali]] ►
