---
sutta_code: "SN11.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Vatapadasutta "
  - "Vows"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.11]]
> ◄  [[sn11.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.12-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 11. Sakkasaṁyutta: With Sakka

### II. The Second Chapter — SN11.11: Vows
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, in a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka. What seven?


As long as I live, may I support my parents.

As long as I live, may I honor the elders in the family.

As long as I live, may I speak gently.

As long as I live, may I not speak divisively.

As long as I live, may I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.

As long as I live, may I speak the truth.

As long as I live, may I be free of anger, or should anger arise, may I quickly get rid of it.

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka.

2A person who respects their parents,  
and honors the elders in the family,  
whose speech is gentle and courteous,  
and has given up divisiveness;

3who’s committed to getting rid of stinginess,  
is truthful, and has mastered anger:  
the gods of the Thirty-Three  
call them truly a good person.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ.

"Sakkassa, bhikkhave, devānamindassa pubbe manussabhūtassa satta vatapadāni samattāni samādinnāni ahesuṁ, yesaṁ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṁ ajjhagā. Katamāni satta vatapadāni?


Yāvajīvaṁ mātāpettibharo assaṁ,

yāvajīvaṁ kule jeṭṭhāpacāyī assaṁ,

yāvajīvaṁ saṇhavāco assaṁ,

yāvajīvaṁ apisuṇavāco assaṁ,

yāvajīvaṁ vigatamalamaccherena cetasā agāraṁ ajjhāvaseyyaṁ muttacāgo payatapāṇi vossaggarato yācayogo dānasaṁvibhāgarato,

yāvajīvaṁ saccavāco assaṁ,

yāvajīvaṁ akkodhano assaṁ – sacepi me kodho uppajjeyya, khippameva naṁ paṭivineyyanti.

Sakkassa, bhikkhave, devānamindassa pubbe manussabhūtassa imāni satta vatapadāni samattāni samādinnāni ahesuṁ, yesaṁ samādinnattā sakko sakkattaṁ ajjhagāti.

2Mātāpettibharaṁ jantuṁ,  
kule jeṭṭhāpacāyinaṁ;  
Saṇhaṁ sakhilasambhāsaṁ,  
pesuṇeyyappahāyinaṁ.

3Maccheravinaye yuttaṁ,  
saccaṁ kodhābhibhuṁ naraṁ;  
Taṁ ve devā tāvatiṁsā,  
āhu sappuriso itī"ti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn11.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.33]], [[SA-3.21]], [[SA1104]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.33]], [[SA-3.21]], [[SA1104]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.11]]
> ◄  [[sn11.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.12-sujato-pali]] ►
