---
sutta_code: "SN11.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Vepacittisutta "
  - "Vepacitti or Patience"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.4]]
> ◄  [[sn11.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.5-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 11. Sakkasaṁyutta: With Sakka

### I. The First Chapter — SN11.4: With Vepacitti
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“Once upon a time, bhikkhus, a battle was fought between the gods and the demons.

Then Vepacitti, lord of demons, addressed the demons, ‘My good sirs, if the demons defeat the gods in this battle, bind Sakka, the lord of gods, by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the castle of demons.’

Meanwhile, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the Thirty-Three, ‘My good sirs, if the gods defeat the demons in this battle, bind Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the Sudhamma hall of the gods.’

In that battle the gods won and the demons lost. So the gods of the Thirty-Three bound Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and brought him to Sakka’s presence in the Sudhamma hall of the gods.

And as Sakka was entering and leaving the hall, Vepacitti abused and insulted him with rude, harsh words. So Mātali the charioteer addressed Sakka in verse,


2‘O Maghavā, O Sakka,  
is it from fear or from weakness  
that you put up with such harsh words  
in the presence of Vepacitti?’

3‘It’s not out of fear or weakness  
that I’m patient with Vepacitti.  
For how can a sensible person like me  
get in a fight with a fool?’

4‘Fools would vent even more  
if there’s no-one to put a stop to them.  
So a wise one should stop  
a fool with forceful punishment.’

5‘I think that this is the only way  
to put a stop to a fool,  
when you know that the other is upset,  
be mindful and stay calm.’

6‘I see this fault, Vāsava,  
in just being patient.  
When a fool thinks,  
“He puts up with me out of fear,”  
the idiot will go after you even harder,  
like a cow chasing someone who runs away.’

7‘Let him think this if he wishes, or not —  
“He puts up with me out of fear.”  
Of goals culminating in one’s own good,  
none better than patience is found.

8When a strong person  
puts up with a weakling,  
they call that the ultimate patience,  
for a weakling must always be patient.

9The strength of folly  
is really just weakness, they say.  
But no-one can challenge a person  
who’s strong, guarded by the teaching.

10When you get angry at an angry person  
you just make things worse for yourself.  
When you don’t get angry at an angry person  
you win a battle hard to win.

11When you know that the other is angry,  
you act for the good of both  
yourself and the other  
if you’re mindful and stay calm.

12People unfamiliar with the teaching  
consider one who heals both  
oneself and the other  
to be a fool.’

13So, bhikkhus, even Sakka, lord of gods — while living off of the fruit of his good and bad deeds, and ruling as sovereign lord over these gods of the Thirty-Three — will speak in praise of patience and gentleness. But since you have gone forth in such a well explained teaching and training, it would be truly beautiful for you to be patient and gentle!”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Bhūtapubbaṁ, bhikkhave, devāsurasaṅgāmo samupabyūḷho ahosi.

Atha kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo asure āmantesi: ‘Sace, mārisā, devānaṁ asurasaṅgāme samupabyūḷhe asurā jineyyuṁ devā parājineyyuṁ, yena naṁ sakkaṁ devānamindaṁ kaṇṭhapañcamehi bandhanehi bandhitvā mama santike āneyyātha asurapuran’ti.

Sakkopi kho, bhikkhave, devānamindo deve tāvatiṁse āmantesi: ‘Sace, mārisā, devānaṁ asurasaṅgāme samupabyūḷhe devā jineyyuṁ asurā parājineyyuṁ, yena naṁ vepacittiṁ asurindaṁ kaṇṭhapañcamehi bandhanehi bandhitvā mama santike āneyyātha sudhammasabhan’ti.

Tasmiṁ kho pana, bhikkhave, saṅgāme devā jiniṁsu, asurā parājiniṁsu. Atha kho, bhikkhave, devā tāvatiṁsā vepacittiṁ asurindaṁ kaṇṭhapañcamehi bandhanehi bandhitvā sakkassa devānamindassa santike ānesuṁ sudhammasabhaṁ.

Tatra sudaṁ, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo kaṇṭhapañcamehi bandhanehi baddho sakkaṁ devānamindaṁ sudhammasabhaṁ pavisantañca nikkhamantañca asabbhāhi pharusāhi vācāhi akkosati paribhāsati. Atha kho, bhikkhave, mātali saṅgāhako sakkaṁ devānamindaṁ gāthāhi ajjhabhāsi: 


2‘Bhayā nu maghavā sakka,  
dubbalyā no titikkhasi;  
Suṇanto pharusaṁ vācaṁ,  
sammukhā vepacittino’ti.

3‘Nāhaṁ bhayā na dubbalyā,  
khamāmi vepacittino;  
Kathañhi mādiso viññū,  
bālena paṭisaṁyuje’ti.

4‘Bhiyyo bālā pabhijjeyyuṁ,  
no cassa paṭisedhako;  
Tasmā bhusena daṇḍena,  
dhīro bālaṁ nisedhaye’ti.

5‘Etadeva ahaṁ maññe,  
bālassa paṭisedhanaṁ;  
Paraṁ saṅkupitaṁ ñatvā,  
yo sato upasammatī’ti.

6‘Etadeva titikkhāya,  
vajjaṁ passāmi vāsava;  
Yadā naṁ maññati bālo,  
bhayā myāyaṁ titikkhati;  
Ajjhāruhati dummedho,  
gova bhiyyo palāyinan’ti.

7‘Kāmaṁ maññatu vā mā vā,  
bhayā myāyaṁ titikkhati;  
Sadatthaparamā atthā,  
khantyā bhiyyo na vijjati.

8Yo have balavā santo,  
dubbalassa titikkhati;  
Tamāhu paramaṁ khantiṁ,  
niccaṁ khamati dubbalo.

9Abalaṁ taṁ balaṁ āhu,  
yassa bālabalaṁ balaṁ;  
Balassa dhammaguttassa,  
paṭivattā na vijjati.

10Tasseva tena pāpiyo,  
yo kuddhaṁ paṭikujjhati;  
Kuddhaṁ appaṭikujjhanto,  
saṅgāmaṁ jeti dujjayaṁ.

11Ubhinnamatthaṁ carati,  
attano ca parassa ca;  
Paraṁ saṅkupitaṁ ñatvā,  
yo sato upasammati.

12Ubhinnaṁ tikicchantānaṁ,  
attano ca parassa ca;  
Janā maññanti bāloti,  
ye dhammassa akovidā’ti.

13So hi nāma, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo sakaṁ puññaphalaṁ upajīvamāno devānaṁ tāvatiṁsānaṁ issariyādhipaccaṁ rajjaṁ kārento khantisoraccassa vaṇṇavādī bhavissati. Idha kho taṁ, bhikkhave, sobhetha yaṁ tumhe evaṁ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitā samānā khamā ca bhaveyyātha soratā cā"ti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn11.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA34.8]], [[SA-2.39]], [[SA1110]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA34.8]], [[SA-2.39]], [[SA1110]], [[SN7.2]], [[SN7.3]], [[SN11.5]], [[THAG6]].12 |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.4]]
> ◄  [[sn11.3-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.5-sujato-pali]] ►
