---
sutta_code: "SN11.6"
sutta_title:
  - "Kulāvakasutta "
  - "The Bird Nests"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.6]]
> ◄  [[sn11.5-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.7-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 11. Sakkasaṁyutta: With Sakka

### I. The First Chapter — SN11.6: Bird Nests
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“Once upon a time, bhikkhus, a battle was fought between the gods and the demons. In that battle the demons won and the gods lost. Defeated, the gods fled north with the demons in pursuit.

Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his charioteer Mātali in verse:

2‘Mātali, don’t ram the bird nests  
in the red silk-cotton woods with your chariot pole.  
I’d rather give up our lives to the demons  
than deprive these birds of their nests.’

3‘Yes, lord,’ replied Mātali. And he turned the chariot back around, with its team of a thousand thoroughbreds.

Then the demons thought, ‘Now Sakka’s chariot has turned back. The demons will have to fight the gods a second time!’ Terrified, they retreated right away to the castle of the demons.

And that’s how Sakka came to win victory by principle.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ.

"Bhūtapubbaṁ, bhikkhave, devāsurasaṅgāmo samupabyūḷho ahosi. Tasmiṁ kho pana, bhikkhave, saṅgāme asurā jiniṁsu, devā parājiniṁsu. Parājitā ca kho, bhikkhave, devā apāyaṁsveva uttarenamukhā, abhiyaṁsveva ne asurā.

Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo mātali saṅgāhakaṁ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: 

2‘Kulāvakā mātali simbalismiṁ,  
Īsāmukhena parivajjayassu;  
Kāmaṁ cajāma asuresu pāṇaṁ,  
Māyime dijā vikulāvakā ahesun’ti.

3‘Evaṁ, bhaddantavā’ti kho, bhikkhave, mātali saṅgāhako sakkassa devānamindassa paṭissutvā sahassayuttaṁ ājaññarathaṁ paccudāvattesi.

Atha kho, bhikkhave, asurānaṁ etadahosi: ‘paccudāvatto kho dāni sakkassa devānamindassa sahassayutto ājaññaratho. Dutiyampi kho devā asurehi saṅgāmessantī’ti bhītā asurapurameva pāvisiṁsu.

Iti kho, bhikkhave, sakkassa devānamindassa dhammena jayo ahosī"ti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn11.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.49]], [[SA1222]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.49]], [[SA1222]], [[JA31]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.6]]
> ◄  [[sn11.5-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.7-sujato-pali]] ►
