---
sutta_code: "SN11.19"
sutta_title:
  - "Satthāravandanāsutta "
  - "The Worship of the Teacher (or Sakka's Worship (2))"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.19]]
> ◄  [[sn11.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.20-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 11. Sakkasaṁyutta: With Sakka

### II. The Second Chapter — SN11.19: Who Sakka Worships (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove.

“Once upon a time, bhikkhus, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his charioteer Mātali, ‘My dear Mātali, harness the chariot with its team of a thousand thoroughbreds. We will go to a park and see the scenery.’

‘Yes, lord,’ replied Mātali. He harnessed the chariot and informed Sakka, ‘Good sir, the chariot with its team of a thousand thoroughbreds has been harnessed. Please go at your convenience.’

Then Sakka descended from the Palace of Victory, raised his joined palms, and revered the Buddha.

So Mātali the charioteer addressed Sakka in verse:


2‘Gods and men  
worship you, Vāsava.  
So what’s the name of the spirit  
that you worship, Sakka?’

3‘It’s the fully awakened Buddha,  
the Teacher of peerless name  
in this world with its gods—  
that’s who I worship, Mātali.

4Those who have discarded  
greed, hate, and ignorance,  
the perfected ones with defilements ended—  
they're who I worship, Mātali.

5The trainees who take pleasure in decreasing suffering,  
diligently pursuing the training  
for getting rid of greed and hate,  
and going past ignorance—  
they’re who I worship, Mātali.’

6‘Those who you worship  
seem to be the best in the world, Sakka.  
I too will worship  
those who you worship, Sakka.’

7After saying this, Maghavā the chief,  
king of gods, Sujā’s husband,  
having worshipped the Buddha,  
climbed into his chariot.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ jetavane.

"Bhūtapubbaṁ, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo mātaliṁ saṅgāhakaṁ āmantesi: ‘yojehi, samma mātali, sahassayuttaṁ ājaññarathaṁ, uyyānabhūmiṁ gacchāma subhūmiṁ dassanāyā’ti.

‘Evaṁ, bhaddantavā’ti kho, bhikkhave, mātali saṅgāhako sakkassa devānamindassa paṭissutvā sahassayuttaṁ ājaññarathaṁ yojetvā sakkassa devānamindassa paṭivedesi: ‘yutto kho te, mārisa, sahassayutto ājaññaratho. Yassadāni kālaṁ maññasī’ti.

Atha kho, bhikkhave, sakko devānamindo vejayantapāsādā orohanto añjaliṁ katvā sudaṁ bhagavantaṁ namassati.

Atha kho, bhikkhave, mātali saṅgāhako sakkaṁ devānamindaṁ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi: 


2‘Yañhi devā manussā ca,  
taṁ namassanti vāsava;  
Atha ko nāma so yakkho,  
yaṁ tvaṁ sakka namassasī’ti.

3‘Yo idha sammāsambuddho,  
asmiṁ loke sadevake;  
Anomanāmaṁ satthāraṁ,  
taṁ namassāmi mātali.

4Yesaṁ rāgo ca doso ca,  
avijjā ca virājitā;  
Khīṇāsavā arahanto,  
te namassāmi mātali.

5Ye rāgadosavinayā,  
avijjāsamatikkamā;  
Sekkhā apacayārāmā,  
appamattānusikkhare;  
Te namassāmi mātalī’ti.

6‘Seṭṭhā hi kira lokasmiṁ,  
ye tvaṁ sakka namassasi;  
Ahampi te namassāmi,  
ye namassasi vāsavā’ti.

7Idaṁ vatvāna maghavā,  
devarājā sujampati;  
Bhagavantaṁ namassitvā,  
pamukho rathamāruhī"ti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn11.19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.40]], [[SA1111]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.40]], [[SA1111]], [[JA497]], [[SN1.23]], [[SN7.6]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.79]], [[THĪ282-83]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.19]]
> ◄  [[sn11.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn11.20-sujato-pali]] ►
