---
sutta_code: "SN46.76"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.76]]
> ◄  [[sn46.75-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.77-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### VIII. Cessation — SN46.76: Cessation
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, when the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial.


How so?


It’s when a bhikkhu develops the perception of cessation together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how, when the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated, it’s very fruitful and beneficial.


2When the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated you can expect one of two results: enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return.


How so?


It’s when a bhikkhu develops the perception of cessation together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. When the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect one of two results: enlightenment in the present life, or if there’s something left over, non-return.”


3“The perception of cessation, when developed and cultivated, leads to great benefit … great sanctuary … great inspiration … great ease.


How so?


It’s when a bhikkhu develops the perception of cessation together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how the perception of cessation, when developed and cultivated, leads to great benefit … great sanctuary … great inspiration … great ease.”

1"Nirodhasaññā, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsā.


Kathaṁ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññā kathaṁ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsā?


Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nirodhasaññāsahagataṁ satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti … pe … nirodhasaññāsahagataṁ upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññā evaṁ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṁsāti.


2Nirodhasaññāya, bhikkhave, bhāvitāya bahulīkatāya dvinnaṁ phalānaṁ aññataraṁ phalaṁ pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā.


Kathaṁ bhāvitāya, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññāya kathaṁ bahulīkatāya dvinnaṁ phalānaṁ aññataraṁ phalaṁ pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitā?


Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nirodhasaññāsahagataṁ satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti … pe … nirodhasaññāsahagataṁ upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ bhāvitāya kho, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññāya evaṁ bahulīkatāya dvinnaṁ phalānaṁ aññataraṁ phalaṁ pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – diṭṭheva dhamme aññā, sati vā upādisese anāgāmitāti.


3Nirodhasaññā, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahato atthāya saṁvattati, mahato yogakkhemāya saṁvattati, mahato saṁvegāya saṁvattati, mahato phāsuvihārāya saṁvattati.


Kathaṁ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññā kathaṁ bahulīkatā mahato atthāya saṁvattati, mahato yogakkhemāya saṁvattati, mahato saṁvegāya saṁvattati, mahato phāsuvihārāya saṁvattati?


Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nirodhasaññāsahagataṁ satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti … pe … nirodhasaññāsahagataṁ upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, nirodhasaññā evaṁ bahulīkatā mahato atthāya saṁvattati, mahato yogakkhemāya saṁvattati, mahato saṁvegāya saṁvattati, mahato phāsuvihārāya saṁvattatī"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Nirodhavaggo aṭṭhamo.

4Asubhamaraṇaāhāre,  
Paṭikūlaanabhiratena;  
Aniccadukkhaanattapahānaṁ,  
Virāganirodhena te dasāti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.76-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.76]]
> ◄  [[sn46.75-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.77-pali-sc]] ►
