---
sutta_code: "SN46.23"
sutta_title:
  - "Ṭhāniyasutta "
  - "A Basis"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.23]]
> ◄  [[sn46.22-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.24-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### III. With Udāyī — SN46.23: Grounds
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, when you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for sensual greed, sensual desire arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. When you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for ill will, ill will arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. When you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for dullness and drowsiness, dullness and drowsiness arise, and once arisen they increase and grow. When you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for restlessness and remorse, restlessness and remorse arise, and once arisen they increase and grow. When you frequently attend improperly to things that are grounds for doubt, doubt arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.

2When you frequently attend properly on things that are grounds for the awakening factor of mindfulness, the awakening factor of mindfulness arises, and once arisen it’s fully developed. … When you frequently attend properly on things that are grounds for the awakening factor of equanimity, the awakening factor of equanimity arises, and once arisen it’s fully developed.”

1"Kāmarāgaṭṭhāniyānaṁ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṁ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppanno ceva kāmacchando uppajjati, uppanno ca kāmacchando bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṁvattati. Byā pāda ṭṭhāniyānaṁ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṁ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppanno ceva byāpādo uppajjati, uppanno ca byāpādo bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṁvattati. Thinamiddhaṭṭhāniyānaṁ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṁ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppannañceva thinamiddhaṁ uppajjati, uppannañca thinamiddhaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṁvattati. Uddhaccakukkuccaṭṭhāniyānaṁ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṁ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppannañceva uddhaccakukkuccaṁ uppajjati, uppannañca uddhaccakukkuccaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṁvattati. Vicikicchāṭṭhāniyānaṁ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṁ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppannā ceva vicikicchā uppajjati, uppannā ca vicikicchā bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saṁvattati.

2Satisambojjhaṅgaṭṭhāniyānaṁ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṁ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppanno ceva satisambojjhaṅgo uppajjati, uppanno ca satisambojjhaṅgo bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchati … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṭṭhāniyānaṁ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṁ manasikārabahulīkārā anuppanno ceva upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo uppajjati, uppanno ca upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchatī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA704]] | S v 84 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN46.35]], [[SN46.24]], [[SA704]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN46.53]], [[SN46.51]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.23]]
> ◄  [[sn46.22-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.24-pali-sc]] ►
