---
sutta_code: "SN46.77"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.77]]
> ◄  [[sn46.76-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.89-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### IX. Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges — SN46.77-88: Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In the same way, a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a bhikkhu who develops the seven awakening factors slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”


To be expanded for each of the different rivers as in SN45.91-102.

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṅgā nadī pācīnaninnā pācīnapoṇā pācīnapabbhārā; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satta bojjhaṅge bhāvento satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaronto nibbānaninno hoti nibbānapoṇo nibbānapabbhāro"ti.


Yāva esanā pāḷi vitthāretabbā.

Gaṅgāpeyyālavaggo navamo.

2Cha pācīnato ninnā,  
cha ninnā ca samuddato;  
Dvete cha dvādasa honti,  
vaggo tena pavuccatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.77-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.77]]
> ◄  [[sn46.76-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.89-pali-sc]] ►
