---
sutta_code: "SN46.32"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyakusalasutta "
  - "Wholesome (2)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.32]]
> ◄  [[sn46.31-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.33-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### IV. Hindrances — SN46.32: Skillful (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, whatever qualities are skillful, part of the skillful, on the side of the skillful, all of them are rooted in proper attention and meet at proper attention, and proper attention is said to be the best of them. A bhikkhu accomplished in proper attention can expect to develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors.

2And how does a bhikkhu with proper attention develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That’s how a bhikkhu with proper attention develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors.”

1"Ye keci, bhikkhave, dhammā kusalā kusalabhāgiyā kusalapakkhikā, sabbe te yonisomanasikāramūlakā yonisomanasikārasamosaraṇā; yonisomanasikāro tesaṁ dhammānaṁ aggamakkhāyati. Yonisomanasikārasampannassetaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – satta bojjhaṅge bhāvessati, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarissati.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yonisomanasikārasampanno satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkaroti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yonisomanasikārasampanno satta bojjhaṅge bhāveti, satta bojjhaṅge bahulīkarotī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.32-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 91 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN46.53]], [[SN46.51]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.32]]
> ◄  [[sn46.31-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.33-pali-sc]] ►
