---
sutta_code: "SN46.26"
sutta_title:
  - "Taṇhakkhayasutta "
  - "The Destruction of Craving"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.26]]
> ◄  [[sn46.25-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.27-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### III. With Udāyī — SN46.26: The Ending of Craving
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, you should develop the path and the practice that leads to the ending of craving. And what is the path and the practice that leads to the ending of craving? It is the seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.”

When he said this, Udāyī said to him:

“Sir, how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to the ending of craving?”


2“Udāyī, it’s when a bhikkhu develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. As they do so, craving is given up. When craving is given up, deeds are given up. When deeds are given up, suffering is given up. …

A bhikkhu develops the awakening factor of equanimity, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. As they do so, craving is given up. When craving is given up, deeds are given up. When deeds are given up, suffering is given up.

And so, Udāyī, when craving ends, deeds end; when deeds end suffering ends.”

1"Yo, bhikkhave, maggo yā paṭipadā taṇhakkhayāya saṁvattati, taṁ maggaṁ taṁ paṭipadāṁ bhāvetha. Katamo ca, bhikkhave, maggo katamā ca paṭipadā taṇhakkhayāya saṁvattati? Yadidaṁ – satta bojjhaṅgā. Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo"ti.

Evaṁ vutte, āyasmā udāyī bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"Kathaṁ bhāvitā nu kho, bhante, satta bojjhaṅgā, kathaṁ bahulīkatā taṇhakkhayāya saṁvattantī"ti?


2"Idha, udāyi, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ vipulaṁ mahaggataṁ appamāṇaṁ abyāpajjaṁ. Tassa satisambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāvayato vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ vipulaṁ mahaggataṁ appamāṇaṁ abyāpajjaṁ taṇhā pahīyati. Taṇhāya pahānā kammaṁ pahīyati. Kammassa pahānā dukkhaṁ pahīyati … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ vipulaṁ mahaggataṁ appamāṇaṁ abyāpajjaṁ.

Tassa upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṁ bhāvayato vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ vipulaṁ mahaggataṁ appamāṇaṁ abyāpajjaṁ taṇhā pahīyati taṇhāya pahānā kammaṁ pahīyati. Kammassa pahānā dukkhaṁ pahīyati.

Iti kho, udāyi, taṇhakkhayā kammakkhayo, kammakkhayā dukkhakkhayo"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.26-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 86 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.26]]
> ◄  [[sn46.25-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.27-pali-sc]] ►
