---
sutta_code: "SN46.17"
sutta_title:
  - "Pāraṅgamasutta "
  - "Going Beyond"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.17]]
> ◄  [[sn46.16-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.18-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 46. Bojjhaṅgasaṁyutta: On the Awakening Factors

### II. Sick — SN46.17: Going to the Far Shore
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, when these seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated they lead to going from the near shore to the far shore. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, lead to going from the near shore to the far shore.


2Few are those among humans  
who cross to the far shore.  
The rest just run  
around on the near shore.

3When the teaching is well explained,  
those who practice accordingly  
are the ones who will cross over  
Death’s domain so hard to pass.

4Rid of dark qualities,  
an astute person should develop the bright.  
Leaving home behind  
for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,

5you should try to find delight there,  
having left behind sensual pleasures.  
With no possessions, an astute person  
should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.

6And those whose minds are rightly developed  
in the awakening factors;  
letting go of attachments,  
they delight in not grasping.  
With defilements ended, brilliant,  
they are extinguished in this world.”

1"Sattime, bhikkhave, bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā apārā pāraṁ gamanāya saṁvattanti. Katame satta? Satisambojjhaṅgo … pe … upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo – ime kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā apārā pāraṁ gamanāya saṁvattantīti.


2Appakā te manussesu,  
ye janā pāragāmino;  
Athāyaṁ itarā pajā,  
tīramevānudhāvati.

3Ye ca kho sammadakkhāte,  
dhamme dhammānuvattino;  
Te janā pāramessanti,  
maccudheyyaṁ suduttaraṁ.

4Kaṇhaṁ dhammaṁ vippahāya,  
sukkaṁ bhāvetha paṇḍito;  
Okā anokamāgamma,  
viveke yattha dūramaṁ.

5Tatrābhiratimiccheyya,  
hitvā kāme akiñcano;  
Pariyodapeyya attānaṁ,  
cittaklesehi paṇḍito.

6Yesaṁ sambodhiyaṅgesu,  
sammā cittaṁ subhāvitaṁ;  
Ādānappaṭinissagge,  
anupādāya ye ratā;  
Khīṇāsavā jutimanto,  
te loke parinibbutā"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn46.17-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 81 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DHP\|DHP85]], [[AN10.117]], [[AN10.118]], [[AN10.169]], [[AN10.170]], [[SN45.34]], [[DHP\|DHP86]], [[DHP\|DHP87]], [[DHP\|DHP88]], [[DHP\|DHP89]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN45.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN46]]  / 🌐 [[SN46.17]]
> ◄  [[sn46.16-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn46.18-pali-sc]] ►
