---
sutta_code: "MA72"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "長壽王本起 "
  - "History of King Long Life Span"
nikaya:
  - "MA "
  - "Madhyama Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MA71-80"
  - ""
  - "MA 7 King long life span"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Harmony"
  - "Ill will"
  - "Meditation"
sutta_topic:
  - "Friends"
  - "Conflicts end"
  - "Meditation instructions"
sutta_training:
  - "Samādhi"
  - "Sīla"
sutta_stage:
  - "Beginning"
  - "Middle"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: "[[EA24.8]], [[MA185]]"
parallels_partilal: "[[DN22]], [[EA27.1]], [[MA31]], [[EA12.1]], [[MA98]], [[MN10]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA71]]  🌐 [[MA73]] ►

# MA72 - 長壽王本起 - History of King Long Life Span
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> A second discourse set at the quarrel of kosambi, this depicts the Buddha , having failed to achieve reconciliation between the disputing bhikkhus, leaving the monastery. He spends time in the wilderness before encountering an inspiring community of practicing monks. There he discusses in detail obstacles to meditation that he encountered before awakening

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> He abused me, he hit me! 
He beat me, he took from me!’ 
Those who cling to hate like this 
Never settle their enmity. .Those Who never cling to hate 
Always settle their enmity
If you find an alert companion, 
A wise and virtuous friend, 
Then, overcoming all challenges, 
Wander with them, joyful and mindful     living in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes
When I understood that doubt, inattention, of bodily inertia [affecting] 
perception, . . . of sloth-and-torpor, . . . of excessive energy, . . . of lack 
of energy, . . . of fear, . . . of elation, . . . of conceit, . . . of perception of 
diversity, . . . of not contemplating forms arose in my mind, then I purified 
my mind of it.
> 
> For enmity in this world 
Is never settled by enmity. 
It’s only settled by love: 
This is an ancient principle  it’s better to wander alone, 
For a fool can never be a friend. 
Wander alone and do no wrong, 
At ease like a tusker in the wild
 consistently treat these venerables with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private. I Think: ‘why don’t I set aside my own ideas and just go along with these venerables’ 
I practice concentration with [directed] awareness and [sustained] 
contemplation, without 
[directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation, without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation,  exclusive concentration, diversified concentration, 
limited concentration, vast and immeas-urable concentration, I practiced it fully.
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma72-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA24.8]], [[MA185]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DN22]], [[EA27.1]], [[MA31]], [[EA12.1]], [[MA98]], [[MN10]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA73]], [[MN127]], [[MN31]], [[MN48]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA72%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMA72%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA72%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA72%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Ama72-%20-file%3A%22MA71%22%20-file%3A%22MA73%22%20-file%3A%22MA72%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ma72/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA71]]  🌐 [[MA73]] ►
