---
sutta_code: "SN32.57"
sutta_title:
  - "Vassavalāhakasutta "
  - "Gods of the Rainy Clouds"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN32]]  / 🌐 [[SN32.57]]
> ◄  [[sn32.56-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 32. Valāhakasaṁyutta: On Cloud Gods

### I. Gods of the Clouds — SN32.57: Gods of the Rainy Clouds
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes it rains?”

“bhikkhu, there are what are called gods of the rainy clouds. Sometimes they think: ‘Why don’t we revel in our own kind of enjoyment?’ Then, in accordance with their wish, it becomes rainy. This is the cause, this is the reason why sometimes it rains.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yenekadā devo vassatī"ti?

"Santi, bhikkhu, vassavalāhakā nāma devā. Tesaṁ yadā evaṁ hoti: ‘yannūna mayaṁ sakāya ratiyā vaseyyāmā’ti, tesaṁ taṁ cetopaṇidhimanvāya devo vassati. Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo, yenekadā devo vassatī"ti. Sattapaññāsamaṁ.

Sattapaññāsasuttantaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.  
Valāhakavaggo paṭhamo.

2Suddhikaṁ sucaritañca,  
dānūpakārapaññāsaṁ;  
Sītaṁ uṇhañca abbhañca,  
vātavassavalāhakāti.

Valāhakasaṁyuttaṁ samattaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn32.57-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN32]]  / 🌐 [[SN32.57]]
> ◄  [[sn32.56-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
