---
sutta_code: "SN32.53"
sutta_title:
  - "Sītavalāhakasutta "
  - "Gods of the Cool Clouds"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN32]]  / 🌐 [[SN32.53]]
> ◄  [[sn32.13-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn32.54-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 32. Valāhakasaṁyutta: On Cloud Gods

### I. Gods of the Clouds — SN32.53: Gods of the Cool Clouds
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes it becomes cool?”

“bhikkhu, there are what are called gods of the cool clouds. Sometimes they think: ‘Why don’t we revel in our own kind of enjoyment?’ Then, in accordance with their wish, it becomes cool. This is the cause, this is the reason why sometimes it becomes cool.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yenekadā sītaṁ hotī"ti?

"Santi, bhikkhu, sītavalāhakā nāma devā. Tesaṁ yadā evaṁ hoti: ‘yannūna mayaṁ sakāya ratiyā vaseyyāmā’ti, tesaṁ taṁ cetopaṇidhimanvāya sītaṁ hoti. Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo, yenekadā sītaṁ hotī"ti.

Tepaññāsamaṁ.

[[Clean Files 3/Bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN22-34/SN32/SN32.11-20/SN32.13-52#content]][[Clean Files 3/Bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN22-34/SN32/SN32.51-60/SN32.54#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn32.53-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN32]]  / 🌐 [[SN32.53]]
> ◄  [[sn32.13-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn32.54-sujato-pali]] ►
