---
sutta_code: "SN54.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Bojjhaṅgasutta "
  - "Factors of Enlightenment"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.2]]
> ◄  [[sn54.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn54.3-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 54.2 Bojjhaṅgasuttaṃ

## SN 54.2 The Discourse on the Factors of Enlightenment

978. ‘‘Ānāpānassati, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā. Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati kathaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ānāpānassatisahagataṃ satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ, ānāpānassatisahagataṃ dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti…pe… ānāpānassatisahagataṃ upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati evaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā’’ti. Dutiyaṃ.

978."Mindfulness of breathing, monks, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and great benefit. And how, monks, is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be of great fruit and great benefit? Here, monks, a monk develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment. He develops the investigation of phenomena enlightenment factor accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment; he develops the energy enlightenment factor accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment; he develops the rapture enlightenment factor accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment; he develops the tranquility enlightenment factor accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment; he develops the samādhi enlightenment factor accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment; he develops the equanimity enlightenment factor accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment. It is in this way, monks, that mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated to be of great fruit and great benefit." This was the second discourse.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn54.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA804]] | S v 312 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA804]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.8]], [[AN13]], [[MN44]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.2]]
> ◄  [[sn54.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn54.3-deepseek-pali]] ►
