---
sutta_code: "MN117"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahācattārīsaka Sutta "
  - "Great Forty"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN117]]
> ◄  [[mn116-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn118-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 117. Ānāpānassatisuttaṃ

## 117. The Discourse on Mindfulness of Breathing

144. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde sambahulehi abhiññātehi abhiññātehi therehi sāvakehi saddhiṃ – āyasmatā ca sāriputtena āyasmatā ca mahāmoggallānena [mahāmoggalānena (ka.)] āyasmatā ca mahākassapena āyasmatā ca mahākaccāyanena āyasmatā ca mahākoṭṭhikena āyasmatā ca mahākappinena āyasmatā ca mahācundena āyasmatā ca anuruddhena āyasmatā ca revatena āyasmatā ca ānandena, aññehi ca abhiññātehi abhiññātehi therehi sāvakehi saddhiṃ.

144.Thus I have heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park, in Migāra's mother's mansion, together with many distinguished and well-known senior disciples, namely, the Venerable Sāriputta, the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, the Venerable Mahākassapa, the Venerable Mahākaccāyana, the Venerable Mahākoṭṭhika, the Venerable Mahākappina, the Venerable Mahācunda, the Venerable Anuruddha, the Venerable Revata, the Venerable Ānanda, and with other distinguished and well-known senior disciples.

Tena kho pana samayena therā bhikkhū nave bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti. Appekacce therā bhikkhū dasapi bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti, appekacce therā bhikkhū vīsampi bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti, appekacce therā bhikkhū tiṃsampi bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti, appekacce therā bhikkhū cattārīsampi bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti. Te ca navā bhikkhū therehi bhikkhūhi ovadiyamānā anusāsiyamānā uḷāraṃ pubbenāparaṃ visesaṃ jānanti [pajānanti (syā. kaṃ.), sañjānanti (ka.)].

At that time, the senior monks instructed and advised the new monks. Some senior monks instructed and advised ten monks, some senior monks instructed and advised twenty monks, some senior monks instructed and advised thirty monks, and some senior monks instructed and advised forty monks. And those new monks, being instructed and advised by the senior monks, understood a superior, progressive distinction.

145. Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā tadahuposathe pannarase pavāraṇāya puṇṇāya puṇṇamāya rattiyā bhikkhusaṅghaparivuto abbhokāse nisinno hoti. Atha kho bhagavā tuṇhībhūtaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ bhikkhusaṅghaṃ anuviloketvā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘āraddhosmi, bhikkhave, imāya paṭipadāya; āraddhacittosmi, bhikkhave, imāya paṭipadāya. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhiyyosomattāya vīriyaṃ ārabhatha appattassa pattiyā, anadhigatassa adhigamāya, asacchikatassa sacchikiriyāya. Idhevāhaṃ sāvatthiyaṃ komudiṃ cātumāsiniṃ āgamessāmī’’ti. Assosuṃ kho jānapadā bhikkhū – ‘‘bhagavā kira tattheva sāvatthiyaṃ komudiṃ cātumāsiniṃ āgamessatī’’ti. Te jānapadā bhikkhū sāvatthiṃ [sāvatthiyaṃ (syā. kaṃ. pī. ka.)] osaranti bhagavantaṃ dassanāya. Te ca kho therā bhikkhū bhiyyosomattāya nave bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti. Appekacce therā bhikkhū dasapi bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti, appekacce therā bhikkhū vīsampi bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti, appekacce therā bhikkhū tiṃsampi bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti, appekacce therā bhikkhū cattārīsampi bhikkhū ovadanti anusāsanti. Te ca navā bhikkhū therehi bhikkhūhi ovadiyamānā anusāsiyamānā uḷāraṃ pubbenāparaṃ visesaṃ jānanti.

145.Now at that time, on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the full-moon night of the Pavāraṇā, the Blessed One was seated in the open air surrounded by the Sangha of monks. Then the Blessed One surveyed the silent Sangha of monks and addressed them: "I am resolute, monks, in this practice; my mind is resolute, monks, in this practice. Therefore, monks, arouse even more energy for the attainment of the unattained, for the achievement of the unachieved, for the realization of the unrealized. I will remain right here in Sāvatthī for the Komudī four-month season." The monks from the countryside heard: "The Blessed One, it seems, will remain right there in Sāvatthī for the Komudī four-month season." Those monks from the countryside approached Sāvatthī to see the Blessed One. And the senior monks instructed and advised the new monks even more. Some senior monks instructed and advised ten monks, some twenty, some thirty, some even forty. And those new monks, being instructed and advised by the senior monks, came to know a superior distinction beyond the previous one.

146. Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā tadahuposathe pannarase komudiyā cātumāsiniyā puṇṇāya puṇṇamāya rattiyā bhikkhusaṅghaparivuto abbhokāse nisinno hoti. Atha kho bhagavā tuṇhībhūtaṃ tuṇhībhūtaṃ bhikkhusaṅghaṃ anuviloketvā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘apalāpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā; nippalāpāyaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā; suddhā sāre [suddhasāre patiṭṭhitā (syā. kaṃ. pī.)] patiṭṭhitā. Tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṅgho; tathārūpā ayaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā yathārūpā parisā āhuneyyā pāhuneyyā dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa. Tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṅgho; tathārūpā ayaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā yathārūpāya parisāya appaṃ dinnaṃ bahu hoti, bahu dinnaṃ bahutaraṃ. Tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṅgho; tathārūpā ayaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā yathārūpā parisā dullabhā dassanāya lokassa. Tathārūpo ayaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhusaṅgho; tathārūpā ayaṃ, bhikkhave, parisā yathārūpaṃ parisaṃ alaṃ yojanagaṇanāni dassanāya gantuṃ puṭosenāpi’’ [puṭosenāpi, tathārūpo ayaṃ bhikkhave bhikkhusaṃgho, tathārūpā ayaṃ parisā (sī. pī. ka.)].

146.At that time, on the Uposatha day, the fifteenth, the full-moon night of the Komudī festival in the fourth month, the Blessed One was seated in the open air surrounded by the Sangha of monks. Then the Blessed One surveyed the silent Sangha of monks and addressed them: "This assembly, monks, is without senseless talk; this assembly, monks, is without senseless talk; it is pure, standing firm in the essential. Such is this Sangha of monks; such is this assembly, monks, as is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation—an unsurpassed field of merit for the world. Such is this Sangha of monks; such is this assembly, monks, that when a little is given to it, it becomes much, and when much is given, it becomes even more. Such is this Sangha of monks; such is this assembly, monks, that is rare to see in the world. Such is this Sangha of monks; such is this assembly, monks, that it is worth traveling many leagues to see, even with provisions for the journey."

147. ‘‘Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe arahanto khīṇāsavā vusitavanto katakaraṇīyā ohitabhārā anuppattasadatthā parikkhīṇabhavasaṃyojanā sammadaññāvimuttā – evarūpāpi, bhikkhave, santi bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe. Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyino anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā – evarūpāpi, bhikkhave, santi bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe. Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmino sakideva [sakiṃ deva (ka.)] imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissanti – evarūpāpi, bhikkhave, santi bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe. Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyanā – evarūpāpi, bhikkhave, santi bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe.

147.There are, monks, in this Sangha of monks, arahants, with taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, attained their own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through right knowledge—such monks are in this Sangha. There are, monks, in this Sangha of monks, those who, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, are reborn spontaneously, and will attain final Nibbāna there, not returning from that world—such monks are in this Sangha. There are, monks, in this Sangha of monks, those who, with the destruction of three fetters, and with lust, hatred, and delusion weakened, are once-returners, who will return to this world only once more, and make an end of suffering—such monks are in this Sangha. There are, monks, in this Sangha of monks, those who, with the destruction of three fetters, are stream-enterers, no longer subject to downfall, assured, destined for enlightenment—such monks are in this Sangha.

‘‘Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ bhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti – evarūpāpi, bhikkhave, santi bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe. Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe catunnaṃ sammappadhānānaṃ bhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti…pe… catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ… pañcannaṃ indriyānaṃ… pañcannaṃ balānaṃ… sattannaṃ bojjhaṅgānaṃ… ariyassa aṭṭhaṅgikassa maggassa bhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti – evarūpāpi, bhikkhave, santi bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe. Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe mettābhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti… karuṇābhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti… muditābhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti… upekkhābhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti… asubhabhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti… aniccasaññābhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti – evarūpāpi, bhikkhave, santi bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe. Santi, bhikkhave, bhikkhū imasmiṃ bhikkhusaṅghe ānāpānassatibhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā viharanti. Ānāpānassati, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā. Ānāpānassati, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūreti. Cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvitā bahulīkatā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrenti. Satta bojjhaṅgā bhāvitā bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrenti.

There are, monks, in this Sangha who dwell devoted to the practice of the four foundations of mindfulness. Such monks are indeed found in this Sangha. There are monks in this Sangha who dwell devoted to the practice of the four right exertions… the four bases of power… the five faculties… the five powers… the seven factors of enlightenment… the Noble Eightfold Path. Such monks are indeed found in this Sangha. There are monks in this Sangha who dwell devoted to the practice of loving-kindness… compassion… gladness… equanimity… the perception of repulsiveness… the perception of impermanence. Such monks are indeed found in this Sangha. There are monks in this Sangha who dwell devoted to the practice of mindfulness of breathing. Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and great benefit. Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four foundations of mindfulness. The four foundations of mindfulness, when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven factors of enlightenment. The seven factors of enlightenment, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and liberation.

148. ‘‘Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati kathaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. So satova assasati satova [sato (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] passasati.

148.And how, monks, when developed and cultivated, does mindfulness of breathing become of great fruit and great benefit? Here, monks, a monk, gone to the forest, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, sits down; having folded his legs crosswise, set his body erect, and established mindfulness in front of him, ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.

‘‘Dīghaṃ vā assasanto ‘dīghaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti, dīghaṃ vā passasanto ‘dīghaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāti; rassaṃ vā assasanto ‘rassaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti, rassaṃ vā passasanto ‘rassaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāti; ‘sabbakāyapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘sabbakāyapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati.

Breathing in long, he understands, ‘I am breathing in long’; or breathing out long, he understands, ‘I am breathing out long.’ Breathing in short, he understands, ‘I am breathing in short’; or breathing out short, he understands, ‘I am breathing out short.’ He trains himself, ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body’; he trains himself, ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body.’ He trains himself, ‘I shall breathe in calming the bodily formation’; he trains himself, ‘I shall breathe out calming the bodily formation.’

‘‘‘Pītipaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘pītipaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘sukhapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘sukhapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘cittasaṅkhārapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘cittasaṅkhārapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati.

He trains himself: 'I will breathe in experiencing rapture'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out experiencing rapture.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in experiencing pleasure'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out experiencing pleasure.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in experiencing mental fabrication'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out experiencing mental fabrication.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in calming mental fabrication'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out calming mental fabrication.'

‘‘‘Cittapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘cittapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘samādahaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘samādahaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati.

'I will breathe in experiencing the mind,' he trains; 'I will breathe out experiencing the mind,' he trains; 'I will breathe in gladdening the mind,' he trains; 'I will breathe out gladdening the mind,' he trains; 'I will breathe in steadying the mind,' he trains; 'I will breathe out steadying the mind,' he trains; 'I will breathe in liberating the mind,' he trains; 'I will breathe out liberating the mind,' he trains.

‘‘‘Aniccānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘aniccānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘virāgānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘virāgānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘nirodhānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘nirodhānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati. Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati evaṃ bahulīkatā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaṃsā.

"‘I will breathe in observing impermanence,’ he trains; ‘I will breathe out observing impermanence,’ he trains; ‘I will breathe in observing fading away,’ he trains; ‘I will breathe out observing fading away,’ he trains; ‘I will breathe in observing cessation,’ he trains; ‘I will breathe out observing cessation,’ he trains; ‘I will breathe in observing relinquishment,’ he trains; ‘I will breathe out observing relinquishment,’ he trains. Thus developed and cultivated, monks, mindfulness of breathing is of great fruit and great benefit."

149. ‘‘Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati kathaṃ bahulīkatā cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūreti? Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dīghaṃ vā assasanto ‘dīghaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti, dīghaṃ vā passasanto ‘dīghaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāti; rassaṃ vā assasanto ‘rassaṃ assasāmī’ti pajānāti, rassaṃ vā passasanto ‘rassaṃ passasāmī’ti pajānāti; ‘sabbakāyapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘sabbakāyapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ kāyasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; kāye kāyānupassī, bhikkhave, tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. Kāyesu kāyaññatarāhaṃ, bhikkhave, evaṃ vadāmi yadidaṃ – assāsapassāsā. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, kāye kāyānupassī tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ.

149."And how, monks, is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four foundations of mindfulness? In this case, monks, when a monk breathing in long understands, ‘I am breathing in long’; or breathing out long, understands, ‘I am breathing out long’; breathing in short, understands, ‘I am breathing in short’; or breathing out short, understands, ‘I am breathing out short’; he trains himself, ‘I will breathe in experiencing the whole body’; he trains himself, ‘I will breathe out experiencing the whole body’; he trains himself, ‘I will breathe in calming the bodily formation’; he trains himself, ‘I will breathe out calming the bodily formation.’ In this case, monks, a monk dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. Monks, I declare that in-and-out breathing is one of the bodies. Therefore, monks, in this case a monk dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world."

‘‘Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘pītipaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘pītipaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘sukhapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘sukhapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘cittasaṅkhārapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘cittasaṅkhārapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘passambhayaṃ cittasaṅkhāraṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; vedanāsu vedanānupassī, bhikkhave, tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. Vedanāsu vedanāññatarāhaṃ, bhikkhave, evaṃ vadāmi yadidaṃ – assāsapassāsānaṃ sādhukaṃ manasikāraṃ. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, vedanāsu vedanānupassī tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ.

"In this case, monks, when a monk trains himself: 'I will breathe in experiencing rapture,' 'I will breathe out experiencing rapture'; 'I will breathe in experiencing pleasure,' 'I will breathe out experiencing pleasure'; 'I will breathe in experiencing the mental formation,' 'I will breathe out experiencing the mental formation'; 'I will breathe in calming the mental formation,' 'I will breathe out calming the mental formation.' In this case, monks, a monk dwells contemplating feelings in feelings, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. Monks, I declare that careful attention to in-breathing and out-breathing is one of the feelings. Therefore, monks, in this case a monk dwells contemplating feelings in feelings, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world."

‘‘Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘cittapaṭisaṃvedī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘cittapaṭisaṃvedī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘abhippamodayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘samādahaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘samādahaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘vimocayaṃ cittaṃ passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; citte cittānupassī, bhikkhave, tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. Nāhaṃ, bhikkhave, muṭṭhassatissa asampajānassa ānāpānassatiṃ vadāmi. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, citte cittānupassī tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ.

"In this case, monks, when a monk trains himself: 'I will breathe in experiencing the mind'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out experiencing the mind.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in gladdening the mind'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out gladdening the mind.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in concentrating the mind'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out concentrating the mind.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in liberating the mind'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out liberating the mind.' In this case, monks, a monk dwells contemplating mind in the mind, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. Monks, I do not say that mindfulness of breathing is for one who is forgetful and not clearly comprehending. Therefore, monks, in this case a monk dwells contemplating mind in the mind, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world."

‘‘Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘aniccānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘aniccānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘virāgānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘virāgānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘nirodhānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘nirodhānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; ‘paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ti sikkhati, ‘paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmī’ti sikkhati; dhammesu dhammānupassī, bhikkhave, tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. So yaṃ taṃ abhijjhādomanassānaṃ pahānaṃ taṃ paññāya disvā sādhukaṃ ajjhupekkhitā hoti. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, dhammesu dhammānupassī tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ.

"In this case, monks, when a monk trains himself: 'I will breathe in contemplating impermanence'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out contemplating impermanence.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in contemplating fading away'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out contemplating fading away.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in contemplating cessation'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out contemplating cessation.' He trains himself: 'I will breathe in contemplating relinquishment'; he trains himself: 'I will breathe out contemplating relinquishment.' In this case, monks, a monk dwells contemplating phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. Having seen with wisdom the abandoning of covetousness and displeasure, he looks on with equanimity. Therefore, monks, in this case a monk dwells contemplating phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world."

‘‘Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, ānāpānassati evaṃ bahulīkatā cattāro satipaṭṭhāne paripūreti.

"Monks, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way, it fulfills the four foundations of mindfulness."

150. ‘‘Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā kathaṃ bahulīkatā satta bojjhaṅge paripūrenti? Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ, upaṭṭhitāssa tasmiṃ samaye sati hoti asammuṭṭhā [appammuṭṭhā (syā. kaṃ.)]. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno upaṭṭhitā sati hoti asammuṭṭhā, satisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti. Satisambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, satisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

150."And how, monks, when the four foundations of mindfulness are developed and cultivated, do they fulfill the seven factors of enlightenment? Monks, when a monk dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world—in this case mindfulness is present in him, unforgetful. In this case, monks, when mindfulness is present in a monk, unforgetful, in this case the mindfulness enlightenment factor is initiated in him. In this case the monk develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor; in this case the mindfulness enlightenment factor goes to fulfillment by development in the monk."

‘‘So tathāsato viharanto taṃ dhammaṃ paññāya pavicinati pavicayati [pavicarati (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] parivīmaṃsaṃ āpajjati. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāsato viharanto taṃ dhammaṃ paññāya pavicinati pavicayati parivīmaṃsaṃ āpajjati, dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

"Dwelling thus mindful, he investigates, examines, and thoroughly scrutinizes that teaching with wisdom. In this case, monks, when a monk dwelling thus mindful investigates, examines, and thoroughly scrutinizes that teaching with wisdom, the investigation-of-teachings enlightenment factor is aroused in him. In this case, the monk develops the investigation-of-teachings enlightenment factor; in this case, the investigation-of-teachings enlightenment factor goes to fulfillment by development in him."

‘‘Tassa taṃ dhammaṃ paññāya pavicinato pavicayato parivīmaṃsaṃ āpajjato āraddhaṃ hoti vīriyaṃ asallīnaṃ. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno taṃ dhammaṃ paññāya pavicinato pavicayato parivīmaṃsaṃ āpajjato āraddhaṃ hoti vīriyaṃ asallīnaṃ, vīriyasambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, vīriyasambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, vīriyasambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

"As he examines that Dhamma with wisdom, investigating and scrutinizing it, his energy is aroused, unflagging. In this case, monks, when a monk examines that Dhamma with wisdom, investigating and scrutinizing it, his energy is aroused, unflagging, in this case the energy enlightenment factor is aroused in the monk; in this case the monk develops the energy enlightenment factor; in this case the energy enlightenment factor in the monk goes to fulfillment by development."

‘‘Āraddhavīriyassa uppajjati pīti nirāmisā. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno āraddhavīriyassa uppajjati pīti nirāmisā, pītisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, pītisambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, pītisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

"When energy is aroused, unworldly joy arises. In this case, monks, the joy enlightenment factor is aroused in a monk; in this case, the monk develops the joy enlightenment factor; in this case, the joy enlightenment factor in the monk goes to fulfillment by development."

‘‘Pītimanassa kāyopi passambhati, cittampi passambhati. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pītimanassa kāyopi passambhati, cittampi passambhati, passaddhisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, passaddhisambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, passaddhisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

"When one is joyful, the body is calmed, and the mind is calmed. In this case, monks, the tranquility enlightenment factor is initiated in a monk; in this case, the monk develops the tranquility enlightenment factor; in this case, the tranquility enlightenment factor in the monk goes to fulfillment by development."

‘‘Passaddhakāyassa sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno passaddhakāyassa sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati, samādhisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, samādhisambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, samādhisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

"When the body is tranquil and one feels happiness, the mind becomes collected. In this case, monks, in a monk the samādhi enlightenment factor is aroused; in this case, the monk develops the samādhi enlightenment factor; in this case, in the monk the samādhi enlightenment factor goes to fulfillment by development."

‘‘So tathāsamāhitaṃ cittaṃ sādhukaṃ ajjhupekkhitā hoti. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāsamāhitaṃ cittaṃ sādhukaṃ ajjhupekkhitā hoti, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

He observes with equanimity his mind thus collected. At such a time, monks, when a bhikkhu observes with equanimity his mind thus collected, the enlightenment factor of equanimity is aroused in him. At that time he develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity, and the enlightenment factor of equanimity goes to fulfillment by cultivation in him.

151. ‘‘Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vedanāsu…pe… citte… dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ, upaṭṭhitāssa tasmiṃ samaye sati hoti asammuṭṭhā. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno upaṭṭhitā sati hoti asammuṭṭhā, satisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, satisambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, satisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

151.At such a time, monks, when a bhikkhu dwells contemplating feelings in feelings... mind in mind... phenomena in phenomena—ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world—at that time his mindfulness is established and unconfused. At such a time, monks, when a bhikkhu's mindfulness is established and unconfused, the enlightenment factor of mindfulness is aroused in him. At that time he develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness, and the enlightenment factor of mindfulness goes to fulfillment by cultivation in him.

‘‘So tathāsato viharanto taṃ dhammaṃ paññāya pavicinati pavicayati parivīmaṃsaṃ āpajjati. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāsato viharanto taṃ dhammaṃ paññāya pavicinati pavicayati parivīmaṃsaṃ āpajjati, dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

Dwelling thus mindful, he investigates that Dhamma with wisdom, examines it, and scrutinizes it thoroughly. At such a time, monks, when a bhikkhu dwelling thus mindful investigates that Dhamma with wisdom, examines it, and scrutinizes it thoroughly, the enlightenment factor of investigation of phenomena is aroused in him. At that time he develops the enlightenment factor of investigation of phenomena, and the enlightenment factor of investigation of phenomena goes to fulfillment by cultivation in him.

‘‘Tassa taṃ dhammaṃ paññāya pavicinato pavicayato parivīmaṃsaṃ āpajjato āraddhaṃ hoti vīriyaṃ asallīnaṃ. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno taṃ dhammaṃ paññāya pavicinato pavicayato parivīmaṃsaṃ āpajjato āraddhaṃ hoti vīriyaṃ asallīnaṃ, vīriyasambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, vīriyasambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, vīriyasambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

As he investigates that Dhamma with wisdom, examines it, and scrutinizes it, his energy is aroused, unflagging. At such a time, monks, when a bhikkhu's energy is aroused, unflagging, as he investigates that Dhamma with wisdom, examines it, and scrutinizes it, the enlightenment factor of energy is aroused in him. At that time he develops the enlightenment factor of energy, and the enlightenment factor of energy goes to fulfillment by cultivation in him.

‘‘Āraddhavīriyassa uppajjati pīti nirāmisā. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno āraddhavīriyassa uppajjati pīti nirāmisā, pītisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, pītisambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, pītisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

For one who has aroused energy, non-sensual rapture arises. At such a time, monks, when non-sensual rapture arises in a bhikkhu who has aroused energy, the enlightenment factor of rapture is aroused in him. At that time he develops the enlightenment factor of rapture, and the enlightenment factor of rapture goes to fulfillment by cultivation in him.

‘‘Pītimanassa kāyopi passambhati, cittampi passambhati. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pītimanassa kāyopi passambhati, cittampi passambhati, passaddhisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, passaddhisambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, passaddhisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

For one with rapture in mind, the body becomes tranquil, and the mind becomes tranquil. At such a time, monks, when the body of a bhikkhu with rapture in mind becomes tranquil, and the mind becomes tranquil, the enlightenment factor of tranquility is aroused in him. At that time he develops the enlightenment factor of tranquility, and the enlightenment factor of tranquility goes to fulfillment by cultivation in him.

‘‘Passaddhakāyassa sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno passaddhakāyassa sukhino cittaṃ samādhiyati, samādhisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, samādhisambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, samādhisambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati.

When the body is tranquil and one is happy, the mind becomes collected. At such a time, monks, when the mind of a bhikkhu whose body is tranquil and who is happy becomes collected, the enlightenment factor of samādhi is aroused in him. At that time he develops the enlightenment factor of samādhi, and the enlightenment factor of samādhi goes to fulfillment by cultivation in him.

‘‘So tathāsamāhitaṃ cittaṃ sādhukaṃ ajjhupekkhitā hoti. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu tathāsamāhitaṃ cittaṃ sādhukaṃ ajjhupekkhitā hoti, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno āraddho hoti, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhu bhāveti, upekkhāsambojjhaṅgo tasmiṃ samaye bhikkhuno bhāvanāpāripūriṃ gacchati. Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, cattāro satipaṭṭhānā evaṃ bahulīkatā satta sambojjhaṅge paripūrenti.

He observes with equanimity his mind thus collected. At such a time, monks, when a bhikkhu observes with equanimity his mind thus collected, the enlightenment factor of equanimity is aroused in him. At that time he develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity, and the enlightenment factor of equanimity goes to fulfillment by cultivation in him. Thus developed, monks, and thus cultivated, the four foundations of mindfulness fulfill the seven enlightenment factors.

152. ‘‘Kathaṃ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā kathaṃ bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrenti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu satisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. Dhammavicayasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti…pe… vīriyasambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti… pītisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti… passaddhisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti… samādhisambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti… upekkhāsambojjhaṅgaṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. Evaṃ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, satta bojjhaṅgā evaṃ bahulīkatā vijjāvimuttiṃ paripūrentī’’ti.

152.And how, monks, when developed and cultivated, do the seven factors of enlightenment fulfill knowledge and liberation? Here, monks, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment. He develops the enlightenment factor of investigation of phenomena... the enlightenment factor of energy... the enlightenment factor of rapture... the enlightenment factor of tranquility... the enlightenment factor of samādhi... the enlightenment factor of equanimity dependent on seclusion, dependent on dispassion, dependent on cessation, culminating in relinquishment. Thus, monks, when the seven factors of enlightenment are developed and cultivated in this way, they fulfill knowledge and liberation.

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti.

Thus spoke the Blessed One. The bhikkhus were pleased and delighted in the Blessed One's words.

Ānāpānassatisuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ aṭṭhamaṃ.

The Discourse on Mindfulness of Breathing, the eighth, is concluded.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn117-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA189]]; [[SA784]]; [[SA785]] | M iii 71 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA189]], [[SA785]], [[SA784]], [[AN4.30]], [[SN22.62]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.15]], [[SN45.1]], [[SN45.8]], [[AN5.25]], [[AN5.28]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN117]]
> ◄  [[mn116-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn118-deepseek-pali]] ►
