---
sutta_code: "MN125"
sutta_title:
  - "Dantabhūmi Sutta "
  - "Level of the Tamed"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN125]]
> ◄  [[mn124-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn126-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 125. Bhūmijasuttaṃ

## 125. The Bhūmija Sutta

223. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe. Atha kho āyasmā bhūmijo pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena jayasenassa rājakumārassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Atha kho jayaseno rājakumāro yenāyasmā bhūmijo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā bhūmijena saddhiṃ sammodi. Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho jayaseno rājakumāro āyasmantaṃ bhūmijaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘santi, bho bhūmija, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā [carati, abhabbo (sī. pī.) evamuparipi ekavacaneneva dissati] phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi [āsañca anāsañca cepi (aṭṭha.)] karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāyā’ti. Idha bhoto bhūmijassa satthā kiṃvādī [kiṃvādī kiṃdiṭṭhī (syā. kaṃ. ka.)] kimakkhāyī’’ti? ‘‘Na kho metaṃ, rājakumāra, bhagavato sammukhā sutaṃ, sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ. Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ vijjati yaṃ bhagavā evaṃ byākareyya – ‘āsañcepi karitvā ayoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā ayoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā ayoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā ayoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Āsañcepi karitvā yoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā yoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā yoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā yoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāyā’ti. Na kho me taṃ, rājakumāra, bhagavato sammukhā sutaṃ, sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ. Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ vijjati yaṃ bhagavā evaṃ byākareyyā’’ti. ‘‘Sace kho bhoto bhūmijassa satthā evaṃvādī [evaṃvādī evaṃdiṭṭhī (syā. kaṃ. ka.)] evamakkhāyī, addhā bhoto bhūmijassa satthā sabbesaṃyeva puthusamaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ muddhānaṃ [buddhānaṃ (ka.) muddhānantimuddhaṃ, matthakanti attho] maññe āhacca tiṭṭhatī’’ti. Atha kho jayaseno rājakumāro āyasmantaṃ bhūmijaṃ sakeneva thālipākena parivisi.

223.Thus have I heard: At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrel Sanctuary. Then, in the morning, Venerable Bhūmija, having dressed, took his bowl and robe, and went to the residence of Prince Jayasena. Having arrived, he sat down on the prepared seat. Then Prince Jayasena approached Venerable Bhūmija, exchanged polite greetings, and when the courteous and amiable talk was concluded, he sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Prince Jayasena said to Venerable Bhūmija: "Venerable Bhūmija, there are some ascetics and brahmins who hold such a view and declare: 'Even practicing the spiritual life with a basis, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life without a basis, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life both with and without a basis, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life neither with nor without a basis, they are incapable of attaining the fruit.' What does your teacher say about this? What does he declare?" "Prince, I have not heard this directly from the Blessed One, nor have I received it face to face. But it is possible that the Blessed One would explain it thus: 'Even practicing the spiritual life with a basis, unskillfully, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life without a basis, unskillfully, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life both with and without a basis, unskillfully, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life neither with nor without a basis, unskillfully, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. But even practicing the spiritual life with a basis, skillfully, they are capable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life without a basis, skillfully, they are capable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life both with and without a basis, skillfully, they are capable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life neither with nor without a basis, skillfully, they are capable of attaining the fruit.' Prince, I have not heard this directly from the Blessed One, nor have I received it face to face. But it is possible that the Blessed One would explain it thus." "If your teacher declares and explains it in this way, Venerable Bhūmija, surely your teacher, I think, stands head and shoulders above all other ascetics and brahmins!" Then Prince Jayasena served Venerable Bhūmija with his own bowl of food.

224. Atha kho āyasmā bhūmijo pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā bhūmijo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘idhāhaṃ, bhante, pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena jayasenassa rājakumārassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkamiṃ; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdiṃ. Atha kho, bhante, jayaseno rājakumāro yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā mayā saddhiṃ sammodi. Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho, bhante, jayaseno rājakumāro maṃ etadavoca – ‘santi, bho bhūmija, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāyā’ti. ‘Idha bhoto bhūmijassa satthā kiṃvādī kimakkhāyī’ti? Evaṃ vutte ahaṃ, bhante, jayasenaṃ rājakumāraṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘na kho me taṃ, rājakumāra, bhagavato sammukhā sutaṃ, sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ. Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ vijjati yaṃ bhagavā evaṃ byākareyya – āsañcepi karitvā ayoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā ayoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā ayoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā ayoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Āsañcepi karitvā yoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā yoniso brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāyāti. Na kho me taṃ, rājakumāra, bhagavato sammukhā sutaṃ, sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ. Ṭhānañca kho etaṃ vijjati yaṃ bhagavā evaṃ byākareyyā’ti. ‘Sace bhoto bhūmijassa satthā evaṃvādī evamakkhāyī, addhā bhoto bhūmijassa satthā sabbesaṃyeva puthusamaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ muddhānaṃ maññe āhacca tiṭṭhatī’ti. ‘Kaccāhaṃ, bhante, evaṃ puṭṭho evaṃ byākaramāno vuttavādī ceva bhagavato homi, na ca bhagavantaṃ abhūtena abbhācikkhāmi, dhammassa cānudhammaṃ byākaromi, na ca koci sahadhammiko vādānuvādo gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgacchatī’’’ti?

224.Then, in the afternoon, Venerable Bhūmija, having returned from the alms round, approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Seated to one side, Venerable Bhūmija said to the Blessed One: "Just now, Venerable Sir, in the morning, having dressed and taken my bowl and robe, I went to the residence of Prince Jayasena. Having arrived, I sat down on the prepared seat. Then, Venerable Sir, Prince Jayasena approached me. Having approached, he exchanged polite greetings, and when the courteous and amiable talk was concluded, he sat down to one side. Seated to one side, Venerable Sir, Prince Jayasena said to me: 'Venerable Bhūmija, there are some ascetics and brahmins who hold such a view and declare: "Even practicing the spiritual life with a basis, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life without a basis… even practicing the spiritual life both with and without a basis… even practicing the spiritual life neither with nor without a basis, they are incapable of attaining the fruit." 'What does your teacher say, Venerable Bhūmija? What does he declare?' When asked this, Venerable Sir, I said to Prince Jayasena: 'Prince, I have not heard this directly from the Blessed One, nor have I received it face to face. But it is possible that the Blessed One might explain it thus: "Even practicing the spiritual life with a basis, unskillfully, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life without a basis, unskillfully, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life both with and without a basis, unskillfully, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life neither with nor without a basis, unskillfully, they are incapable of attaining the fruit. But even practicing the spiritual life with a basis, skillfully, they are capable of attaining the fruit. Even practicing the spiritual life without a basis… even practicing the spiritual life both with and without a basis… even practicing the spiritual life neither with nor without a basis, skillfully, they are capable of attaining the fruit." 'Prince, I have not heard this directly from the Blessed One, nor have I received it face to face. But it is possible that the Blessed One might explain it thus.' 'If your teacher declares and explains it in this way, Venerable Bhūmija, then surely your teacher, I think, stands head and shoulders above all other ascetics and brahmins!' "Venerable Sir, when I answered in this way when asked, did I speak in accordance with the Blessed One’s words? Did I not misrepresent the Blessed One with falsehood? Did I explain in accordance with the Dhamma, so that no co-religious disputant would find grounds for reproach?"

‘‘Taggha tvaṃ, bhūmija, evaṃ puṭṭho evaṃ byākaramāno vuttavādī ceva me hosi, na ca maṃ abhūtena abbhācikkhasi, dhammassa cānudhammaṃ byākarosi, na ca koci sahadhammiko vādānuvādo gārayhaṃ ṭhānaṃ āgacchati. Ye hi keci, bhūmija, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā micchādiṭṭhino micchāsaṅkappā micchāvācā micchākammantā micchāājīvā micchāvāyāmā micchāsatī micchāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

"Indeed, Bhūmija, being questioned thus and answering thus, you are both speaking in accordance with my words and not misrepresenting me with falsehood, and you are explaining the Dhamma in accordance with the Dhamma, so that no co-religious disputant would find grounds for reproach. For, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins have wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong samādhi—even if they practice the spiritual life with a basis, or without a basis, or both with and without a basis, or neither with nor without a basis—they are incapable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is an unskillful way for the attainment of the fruit.

225. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhūmija, puriso telatthiko telagavesī telapariyesanaṃ caramāno vālikaṃ doṇiyā ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ pīḷeyya. Āsañcepi karitvā vālikaṃ doṇiyā ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ pīḷeyya, abhabbo telassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā vālikaṃ doṇiyā ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ pīḷeyya, abhabbo telassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā vālikaṃ doṇiyā ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ pīḷeyya, abhabbo telassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā vālikaṃ doṇiyā ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ pīḷeyya, abhabbo telassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, telassa adhigamāya. Evameva kho, bhūmija, ye hi keci samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā micchādiṭṭhino micchāsaṅkappā micchāvācā micchākammantā micchāājīvā micchāvāyāmā micchāsatī micchāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

225.Bhūmija, suppose a man in need of oil, seeking oil, wandering in search of oil, were to pile sand into a trough and press it, sprinkling it again and again with water. Even if he were to press it with a wish, piling sand into a trough and sprinkling it again and again with water, he would be incapable of obtaining oil. If he were to press it without a wish, piling sand into a trough and sprinkling it again and again with water, he would be incapable of obtaining oil. If he were to press it both with and without a wish, piling sand into a trough and sprinkling it again and again with water, he would be incapable of obtaining oil. If he were to press it neither with nor without a wish, piling sand into a trough and sprinkling it again and again with water, he would be incapable of obtaining oil. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is not the proper way to obtain oil. In the same way, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins hold wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong samādhi—if they were to lead the holy life with a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life without a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life both with and without a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life neither with nor without a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is not the proper way to attain the fruit.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhūmija, puriso khīratthiko khīragavesī khīrapariyesanaṃ caramāno gāviṃ taruṇavacchaṃ visāṇato āviñcheyya [āviñjeyya (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)]. Āsañcepi karitvā gāviṃ taruṇavacchaṃ visāṇato āviñcheyya, abhabbo khīrassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā gāviṃ taruṇavacchaṃ visāṇato āviñcheyya, abhabbo khīrassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, khīrassa adhigamāya. Evameva kho, bhūmija, ye hi keci samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā micchādiṭṭhino…pe… micchāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

Bhūmija, suppose a man in need of milk, seeking milk, wandering in search of milk, were to pull a cow with a young calf by the horn. Even if he were to pull the cow with a young calf by the horn with a wish, he would be incapable of obtaining milk. If he were to pull without a wish... If he were to pull both with and without a wish... If he were to pull neither with nor without a wish, he would be incapable of obtaining milk. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is not the proper way to obtain milk. In the same way, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins hold wrong view... wrong samādhi—if they were to lead the holy life with a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life without a wish... If they were to lead the holy life both with and without a wish... If they were to lead the holy life neither with nor without a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is not the proper way to attain the fruit.

226. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhūmija, puriso navanītatthiko navanītagavesī navanītapariyesanaṃ caramāno udakaṃ kalase āsiñcitvā matthena [manthena (sī.), mattena (ka.)] āviñcheyya. Āsañcepi karitvā udakaṃ kalase āsiñcitvā matthena āviñcheyya, abhabbo navanītassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā udakaṃ kalase āsiñcitvā matthena āviñcheyya, abhabbo navanītassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, navanītassa adhigamāya. Evameva kho, bhūmija, ye hi keci samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā micchādiṭṭhino…pe… micchāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

226.Bhūmija, suppose a man in need of butter, seeking butter, wandering in search of butter, were to pour water into a pot and churn it with a churning stick. Even if he were to churn it with a wish, pouring water into a pot and churning it with a churning stick, he would be incapable of obtaining butter. If he were to churn it without a wish... If he were to churn it both with and without a wish... If he were to churn it neither with nor without a wish, pouring water into a pot and churning it with a churning stick, he would be incapable of obtaining butter. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is not the proper way to obtain butter. In the same way, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins hold wrong view... wrong samādhi—if they were to lead the holy life with a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life without a wish... If they were to lead the holy life both with and without a wish... If they were to lead the holy life neither with nor without a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is not the proper way to attain the fruit.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhūmija, puriso aggitthiko [aggatthiko (sī.)] aggigavesī aggipariyesanaṃ caramāno allaṃ kaṭṭhaṃ sasnehaṃ uttarāraṇiṃ ādāya abhimantheyya [abhimattheyya (syā. kaṃ. pī. ka.)]. Āsañcepi karitvā allaṃ kaṭṭhaṃ sasnehaṃ uttarāraṇiṃ ādāya abhimantheyya, abhabbo aggissa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā allaṃ kaṭṭhaṃ sasnehaṃ uttarāraṇiṃ ādāya abhimantheyya, abhabbo aggissa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, aggissa adhigamāya. Evameva kho, bhūmija, ye hi keci samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā micchādiṭṭhino…pe… micchāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe…āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, abhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ayoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya. Ye hi keci, bhūmija, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā sammādiṭṭhino sammāsaṅkappā sammāvācā sammākammantā sammāājīvā sammāvāyāmā sammāsatī sammāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

Bhūmija, suppose a man in need of fire, seeking fire, wandering in search of fire, were to take a damp, sappy piece of wood as the lower fire-stick and the upper fire-stick also damp and sappy and rub them together. Even if he were to rub them together with a wish, taking a damp, sappy piece of wood as the lower fire-stick and the upper fire-stick also damp and sappy, he would be incapable of obtaining fire. If he were to rub them together without a wish... If he were to rub them together both with and without a wish... If he were to rub them together neither with nor without a wish, taking a damp, sappy piece of wood as the lower fire-stick and the upper fire-stick also damp and sappy, he would be incapable of obtaining fire. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is not the proper way to obtain fire. In the same way, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins hold wrong view... wrong samādhi—if they were to lead the holy life with a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life without a wish... If they were to lead the holy life both with and without a wish... If they were to lead the holy life neither with nor without a wish, they would be incapable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is not the proper way to attain the fruit. But, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins hold right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right samādhi—if they were to lead the holy life with a wish, they would be capable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life without a wish, they would be capable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life both with and without a wish, they would be capable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life neither with nor without a wish, they would be capable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is the proper way to attain the fruit.

227. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhūmija, puriso telatthiko telagavesī telapariyesanaṃ caramāno tilapiṭṭhaṃ doṇiyā ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ pīḷeyya. Āsañcepi karitvā tilapiṭṭhaṃ doṇiyā ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ pīḷeyya, bhabbo telassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā tilapiṭṭhaṃ doṇiyā ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ pīḷeyya, bhabbo telassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, telassa adhigamāya. Evameva kho, bhūmija, ye hi keci samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā sammādiṭṭhino…pe… sammāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

227.Bhūmija, suppose a man in need of oil, seeking oil, wandering in search of oil, were to fill a trough with sesame flour and sprinkle it with water, pressing it again and again. Even if he were to press it with a wish, filling a trough with sesame flour and sprinkling it with water, he would be capable of obtaining oil. If he were to press it without a wish... If he were to press it both with and without a wish... If he were to press it neither with nor without a wish, filling a trough with sesame flour and sprinkling it with water, he would be capable of obtaining oil. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is the proper way to obtain oil. In the same way, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins hold right view... right samādhi—if they were to lead the holy life with a wish, they would be capable of attaining the fruit. If they were to lead the holy life without a wish... If they were to lead the holy life both with and without a wish... If they were to lead the holy life neither with nor without a wish, they would be capable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because, Bhūmija, that is the proper way to attain the fruit.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhūmija, puriso khīratthiko khīragavesī khīrapariyesanaṃ caramāno gāviṃ taruṇavacchaṃ thanato āviñcheyya. Āsañcepi karitvā gāviṃ taruṇavacchaṃ thanato āviñcheyya, bhabbo khīrassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā gāviṃ taruṇavacchaṃ thanato āviñcheyya, bhabbo khīrassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, khīrassa adhigamāya. Evameva kho, bhūmija, ye hi keci samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā sammādiṭṭhino…pe… sammāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā…pe… anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā…pe… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

Just as, Bhūmija, a man needing milk, seeking milk, wandering in search of milk, might draw milk from the teat of a young-calved cow. Even if he does so with exertion, he is capable of obtaining milk; even if without exertion, he is capable of obtaining milk; even if with and without exertion, he is capable of obtaining milk; even if neither with nor without exertion, he is capable of obtaining milk. Why is that? Because that is the source for obtaining milk. In the same way, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins have right view... right samādhi, even if they practice the spiritual life with exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if with and without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if neither with nor without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because that is the source for attaining the fruit.

228. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhūmija, puriso navanītatthiko navanītagavesī navanītapariyesanaṃ caramāno dadhiṃ kalase āsiñcitvā matthena āviñcheyya. Āsañcepi karitvā dadhiṃ kalase āsiñcitvā matthena āviñcheyya, bhabbo navanītassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā dadhiṃ kalase āsiñcitvā matthena āviñcheyya, bhabbo navanītassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, navanītassa adhigamāya. Evameva kho, bhūmija, ye hi keci samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā sammādiṭṭhino…pe… sammāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā… āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā … nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

228.Just as, Bhūmija, a man needing butter, seeking butter, wandering in search of butter, were to pour curds into a pot and churn it with a churn-stick. Even if he does so with exertion, he is capable of obtaining butter; even if without exertion, he is capable of obtaining butter; even if with and without exertion, he is capable of obtaining butter; even if neither with nor without exertion, he is capable of obtaining butter. Why is that? Because that is the source for obtaining butter. In the same way, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins have right view... right samādhi, even if they practice the spiritual life with exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if with and without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if neither with nor without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because that is the source for attaining the fruit.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhūmija, puriso aggitthiko aggigavesī aggipariyesanaṃ caramāno sukkhaṃ kaṭṭhaṃ koḷāpaṃ uttarāraṇiṃ ādāya abhimantheyya; ( ) [(bhabbo aggissa adhigamāya) (sabbattha)] āsañcepi karitvā… anāsañcepi karitvā.. āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā… nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā sukkha kaṭṭhaṃ koḷāpaṃ uttarāraṇiṃ ādāya abhimantheyya, bhabbo aggissa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, aggissa adhigamāya. Evameva kho, bhūmija, ye hi keci samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā sammādiṭṭhino…pe… sammāsamādhino te āsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; āsañca anāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya; nevāsaṃ nānāsañcepi karitvā brahmacariyaṃ caranti, bhabbā phalassa adhigamāya. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yoni hesā, bhūmija, phalassa adhigamāya.

Just as, Bhūmija, a man needing fire, seeking fire, wandering in search of fire, were to take dry wood, a tinder, and an upper fire-stick and vigorously rub them. Even if he does so with exertion, he is capable of obtaining fire; even if without exertion, he is capable of obtaining fire; even if with and without exertion, he is capable of obtaining fire; even if neither with nor without exertion, he is capable of obtaining fire. Why is that? Because that is the source for obtaining fire. In the same way, Bhūmija, whatever ascetics or brahmins have right view... right samādhi, even if they practice the spiritual life with exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if with and without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit; even if neither with nor without exertion, they are capable of attaining the fruit. Why is that? Because that is the source for attaining the fruit.

‘‘Sace kho taṃ, bhūmija, jayasenassa rājakumārassa imā catasso upamā paṭibhāyeyyuṃ anacchariyaṃ te jayaseno rājakumāro pasīdeyya, pasanno ca te pasannākāraṃ kareyyā’’ti. ‘‘Kuto pana maṃ, bhante, jayasenassa rājakumārassa imā catasso upamā paṭibhāyissanti anacchariyā pubbe assutapubbā, seyyathāpi bhagavanta’’nti?

If, Bhūmija, these four similes should occur to Prince Jayasena, it would not be surprising if Prince Jayasena were to be pleased with you, and being pleased, he would show his pleasure to you." "But, venerable sir, how could these four similes, unprecedented and never heard before, occur to Prince Jayasena as they do to the Blessed One?"

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamano āyasmā bhūmijo bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandīti.

Thus spoke the Blessed One. The Venerable Bhūmija, pleased, rejoiced at the Blessed One's words.

Bhūmijasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ chaṭṭhaṃ.

The Bhūmija Sutta, the sixth, is concluded.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn125-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA198]] | M iii 128 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN2]], [[AN4.114]], [[AN4.157]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN5.140]], [[PLI-TV-KD1]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PC65]], [[PLI-TV-BI-VB-PC71]], [[MN107]], [[MA198]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN8.9]], [[AN4.111]], [[MN107]], [[MN65]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN125]]
> ◄  [[mn124-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn126-deepseek-pali]] ►
