---
sutta_code: "MN12"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahāsīhanāda Sutta "
  - "Longer Discourse on the Lion’s Roar"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN12]]
> ◄  [[mn11-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn13-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 12. Mahāsīhanādasuttaṃ

## 12. The Greater Discourse on the Lion's Roar

146. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati bahinagare aparapure vanasaṇḍe. Tena kho pana samayena sunakkhatto licchaviputto acirapakkanto hoti imasmā dhammavinayā. So vesāliyaṃ parisati [parisatiṃ (sī. pī.)] evaṃ [etaṃ (pī. ka.)] vācaṃ bhāsati – ‘‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttari [uttariṃ (pī.)] manussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso. Takkapariyāhataṃ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṃ deseti vīmaṃsānucaritaṃ sayaṃpaṭibhānaṃ. Yassa ca khvāssa atthāya dhammo desito so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’’ti.

146.Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī, outside the city, in the Grove of Aparapura. Now at that time Sunakkhatta, the son of the Licchavis, had recently left this Dhamma and Discipline. He was making this statement in the Vesālī assembly: "The ascetic Gotama does not have any superior human states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. The ascetic Gotama teaches a Dhamma hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry, based on his own intuition. And the Dhamma taught for its purpose leads one who practices it rightly to the complete destruction of suffering."

Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya vesāliṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. Assosi kho āyasmā sāriputto sunakkhattassa licchaviputtassa vesāliyaṃ parisati evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsamānassa – ‘‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttarimanussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso. Takkapariyāhataṃ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṃ deseti vīmaṃsānucaritaṃ sayaṃpaṭibhānaṃ. Yassa ca khvāssa atthāya dhammo desito so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’’ti.

Then, in the morning, Venerable Sāriputta, having dressed, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. Venerable Sāriputta heard Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son speaking thus in the assembly at Vesālī: "The ascetic Gotama has no superior human states, no distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. The ascetic Gotama teaches a Dhamma hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry, based on his own intuition. And the Dhamma taught for its purpose leads one who practices it rightly to the complete destruction of suffering."

Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto vesāliyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘sunakkhatto, bhante, licchaviputto acirapakkanto imasmā dhammavinayā. So vesāliyaṃ parisati evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsati – ‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttarimanussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso. Takkapariyāhataṃ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṃ deseti vīmaṃsānucaritaṃ sayaṃpaṭibhānaṃ. Yassa ca khvāssa atthāya dhammo desito so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’’’ti.

Then, after walking for alms in Vesālī and returning from his alms-round, Venerable Sāriputta went to the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son, who recently left this Dhamma and Discipline, is speaking thus in the assembly at Vesālī: 'The ascetic Gotama has no superior human states, no special distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. The ascetic Gotama teaches a Dhamma hammered out by reasoning, following a line of inquiry, based on his own intuition. And the Dhamma taught for its purpose leads one who practices it rightly to the complete destruction of suffering.'"

147. ‘‘Kodhano heso, sāriputta, sunakkhatto moghapuriso. Kodhā ca panassa esā vācā bhāsitā. ‘Avaṇṇaṃ bhāsissāmī’ti kho, sāriputta, sunakkhatto moghapuriso vaṇṇaṃyeva tathāgatassa bhāsati. Vaṇṇo heso, sāriputta, tathāgatassa yo evaṃ vadeyya – ‘yassa ca khvāssa atthāya dhammo desito so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’ti.

147."Sāriputta, that Sunakkhatta, that foolish man, is angry. And this speech of his is spoken in anger. Sāriputta, that foolish man Sunakkhatta, intending to speak disparagingly, actually speaks in praise of the Tathāgata when he says: ‘And the Dhamma taught for its purpose leads one who practices it rightly to the complete destruction of suffering.' For this, Sāriputta, is indeed a praise of the Tathāgata - if one should say: 'And the Dhamma taught for its purpose leads one who practices it rightly to the complete destruction of suffering.'"

‘‘Ayampi hi nāma, sāriputta, sunakkhattassa moghapurisassa mayi dhammanvayo na bhavissati – ‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi, satthā devamanussānaṃ, buddho bhagavā’ti.

"Indeed, Sāriputta, that foolish man Sunakkhatta will not find in me any understanding of the Dhamma, thinking: 'That Blessed One is an Arahant, a Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, perfect in knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of those to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.'"

‘‘Ayampi hi nāma, sāriputta, sunakkhattassa moghapurisassa mayi dhammanvayo na bhavissati – ‘itipi so bhagavā anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhoti – ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti, bahudhāpi hutvā eko hoti; āvibhāvaṃ, tirobhāvaṃ; tirokuṭṭaṃ tiropākāraṃ tiropabbataṃ asajjamāno gacchati, seyyathāpi ākāse; pathaviyāpi ummujjanimujjaṃ karoti, seyyathāpi udake; udakepi abhijjamāno gacchati, seyyathāpi pathaviyaṃ; ākāsepi pallaṅkena kamati, seyyathāpi pakkhī sakuṇo; imepi candimasūriye evaṃmahiddhike evaṃmahānubhāve pāṇinā parimasati parimajjati; yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṃ vattetī’ti.

"Indeed, Sāriputta, that foolish man Sunakkhatta will not find in me any understanding of the Dhamma thus: 'That Blessed One experiences the various kinds of psychic power: having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered through walls, ramparts, and mountains as if through space; he dives in and out of the earth as if it were water; he goes on water without sinking as if it were earth; he travels cross-legged through the sky like a winged bird; he even touches and strokes with his hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; he wields bodily mastery even as far as the Brahmā world.'"

‘‘Ayampi hi nāma, sāriputta, sunakkhattassa moghapurisassa mayi dhammanvayo na bhavissati – ‘itipi so bhagavā dibbāya sotadhātuyā visuddhāya atikkantamānusikāya ubho sadde suṇāti – dibbe ca mānuse ca, ye dūre santike cā’ti.

"Indeed, Sāriputta, that foolish man Sunakkhatta will not find in me any understanding of the Dhamma thus: 'That Blessed One, with the divine ear-element, purified and surpassing the human, hears both kinds of sounds, divine and human, those far and near.'"

‘‘Ayampi hi nāma, sāriputta, sunakkhattassa moghapurisassa mayi dhammanvayo na bhavissati – ‘itipi so bhagavā parasattānaṃ parapuggalānaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāti – sarāgaṃ vā cittaṃ sarāgaṃ cittanti pajānāti, vītarāgaṃ vā cittaṃ vītarāgaṃ cittanti pajānāti; sadosaṃ vā cittaṃ sadosaṃ cittanti pajānāti, vītadosaṃ vā cittaṃ vītadosaṃ cittanti pajānāti; samohaṃ vā cittaṃ samohaṃ cittanti pajānāti, vītamohaṃ vā cittaṃ vītamohaṃ cittanti pajānāti; saṃkhittaṃ vā cittaṃ saṃkhittaṃ cittanti pajānāti, vikkhittaṃ vā cittaṃ vikkhittaṃ cittanti pajānāti; mahaggataṃ vā cittaṃ mahaggataṃ cittanti pajānāti, amahaggataṃ vā cittaṃ amahaggataṃ cittanti pajānāti; sauttaraṃ vā cittaṃ sauttaraṃ cittanti pajānāti, anuttaraṃ vā cittaṃ anuttaraṃ cittanti pajānāti; samāhitaṃ vā cittaṃ samāhitaṃ cittanti pajānāti, asamāhitaṃ vā cittaṃ asamāhitaṃ cittanti pajānāti; vimuttaṃ vā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ cittanti pajānāti, avimuttaṃ vā cittaṃ avimuttaṃ cittanti pajānātī’ti.

"Indeed, Sāriputta, that foolish man Sunakkhatta will not find any understanding of the Dhamma in me, thinking: ‘Indeed, the Blessed One, with his mind encompassing the minds of other beings, other persons, understands: a mind with lust as a mind with lust, a mind without lust as a mind without lust; a mind with hate as a mind with hate, a mind without hate as a mind without hate; a mind with delusion as a mind with delusion, a mind without delusion as a mind without delusion; a constricted mind as a constricted mind, a scattered mind as a scattered mind; a lofty mind as a lofty mind, a not lofty mind as a not lofty mind; a surpassable mind as a surpassable mind, an unsurpassed mind as an unsurpassed mind; a collected mind as a collected mind, an uncollected mind as an uncollected mind; a liberated mind as a liberated mind, an unliberated mind as an unliberated mind.’"

148. ‘‘Dasa kho panimāni, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalāni yehi balehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti. Katamāni dasa?

148."Sāriputta, these are the ten Tathāgata's powers, endowed with which the Tathāgata claims the foremost place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Brahmā-wheel. What are the ten?"

‘‘Idha, sāriputta, tathāgato ṭhānañca ṭhānato aṭṭhānañca aṭṭhānato yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato ṭhānañca ṭhānato aṭṭhānañca aṭṭhānato yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

"Here, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands what is possible as possible, and what is impossible as impossible, as it really is. Whatever, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands what is possible as possible, and what is impossible as impossible, as it really is, this, Sāriputta, is a power of the Tathāgata, a Tathāgata-power, relying on which the Tathāgata claims the foremost place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā."

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato atītānāgatapaccuppannānaṃ kammasamādānānaṃ ṭhānaso hetuso vipākaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato atītānāgatapaccuppannānaṃ kammasamādānānaṃ ṭhānaso hetuso vipākaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

"Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the resultant outcome of past, future, and present undertakings of action, together with their causes and conditions. And whatever, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the resultant outcome of past, future, and present undertakings of action, together with their causes and conditions, this, Sāriputta, is a power of the Tathāgata, by relying on which the Tathāgata claims the foremost place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the Wheel of Brahmā."

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato sabbatthagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato sabbatthagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

"Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the path leading everywhere. And whatever, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the path leading everywhere, this, Sāriputta, is a power of the Tathāgata whereby the Tathāgata claims the foremost place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the Wheel of Brahmā."

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato anekadhātunānādhātulokaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato anekadhātunānādhātulokaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

"Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the world with its many and diverse elements. And because the Tathāgata understands the world with its many and diverse elements as it actually is, this too, Sāriputta, is a Tathāgata-power of the Tathāgata, by which power the Tathāgata claims the foremost place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā."

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato sattānaṃ nānādhimuttikataṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato sattānaṃ nānādhimuttikataṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

"Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the diverse inclinations of beings. Because the Tathāgata understands the diverse inclinations of beings as they actually are, this too, Sāriputta, is a power of the Tathāgata. Relying on this power, the Tathāgata claims the foremost place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā."

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato parasattānaṃ parapuggalānaṃ indriyaparopariyattaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato parasattānaṃ parapuggalānaṃ indriyaparopariyattaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the varying dispositions of the faculties of other beings and persons. And because the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the varying dispositions of the faculties of other beings and persons, this too, Sāriputta, is a Tathāgata's power, by virtue of which the Tathāgata claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato jhānavimokkhasamādhisamāpattīnaṃ saṃkilesaṃ vodānaṃ vuṭṭhānaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato jhānavimokkhasamādhisamāpattīnaṃ saṃkilesaṃ vodānaṃ vuṭṭhānaṃ yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the defilement, purification, and emergence with regard to the jhānas, liberations, samādhis, and attainments. And because the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the defilement, purification, and emergence with regard to the jhānas, liberations, samādhis, and attainments, this too, Sāriputta, is a Tathāgata's power, by virtue of which the Tathāgata claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, seyyathidaṃ – ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo tissopi jātiyo catassopi jātiyo pañcapi jātiyo dasapi jātiyo vīsampi jātiyo tiṃsampi jātiyo cattālīsampi jātiyo paññāsampi jātiyo jātisatampi jātisahassampi jātisatasahassampi anekepi saṃvaṭṭakappe anekepi vivaṭṭakappe anekepi saṃvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe – ‘amutrāsiṃ evaṃnāmo evaṃgotto evaṃvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṃsukhadukkhappaṭisaṃvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto amutra udapādiṃ; tatrāpāsiṃ evaṃnāmo evaṃgotto evaṃvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṃsukhadukkhappaṭisaṃvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto idhūpapanno’ti. Iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, seyyathidaṃ – ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo…pe… iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past existences, namely, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-contraction, many eons of world-expansion, many eons of world-contraction and world-expansion: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such the end of my life-span; passing away from there, I arose elsewhere; and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such the end of my life-span; passing away from there, I arose here.’ Thus with their aspects and details he recollects his manifold past existences. And because the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past existences with their aspects and details—namely, one birth, two births… many eons of world-contraction and world-expansion—this too, Sāriputta, is a Tathāgata's power, by virtue of which the Tathāgata claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāti – ‘ime vata bhonto sattā kāyaduccaritena samannāgatā vacīduccaritena samannāgatā manoduccaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṃ upavādakā micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannā. Ime vā pana bhonto sattā kāyasucaritena samannāgatā vacīsucaritena samannāgatā manosucaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṃ anupavādakā sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapannā’ti. Iti dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāti – ‘ime vata bhonto sattā kāyaduccaritena samannāgatā vacīduccaritena samannāgatā manoduccaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṃ upavādakā micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannā. Ime vā pana bhonto sattā kāyasucaritena samannāgatā vacīsucaritena samannāgatā manosucaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṃ anupavādakā sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapannā’ti. Iti dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. Idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, sees beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate—and understands beings passing on according to their actions: ‘Indeed, these beings were endowed with misconduct in body, speech, and mind, revilers of the noble ones, possessed of wrong view, and undertaking actions based on wrong view. With the breakup of the body, after death, they have arisen in the plane of misery, a bad destination, the lower realms, hell. But these beings were endowed with good conduct in body, speech, and mind, non-revilers of the noble ones, possessed of right view, and undertaking actions based on right view. With the breakup of the body, after death, they have arisen in a good destination, the heavenly world.’ Thus, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate—and understands beings passing on according to their actions. And because the Tathāgata, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, sees beings passing away and being reborn… and understands beings passing on according to their actions, this too, Sāriputta, is a Tathāgata's power, on account of which the Tathāgata claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, sāriputta, tathāgato āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Yampi, sāriputta, tathāgato āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati, idampi, sāriputta, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṃ hoti yaṃ balaṃ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

Furthermore, Sāriputta, the Tathāgata, by the destruction of the taints, having realized it for himself with direct knowledge, enters and dwells in the taintless liberation of mind and liberation by wisdom in this very life. And because the Tathāgata, by the destruction of the taints, having realized it for himself with direct knowledge, enters and dwells in the taintless liberation of mind and liberation by wisdom in this very life, this too, Sāriputta, is a Tathāgata's power, by virtue of which the Tathāgata claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

‘‘Imāni kho, sāriputta, dasa tathāgatassa tathāgatabalāni yehi balehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

These, Sāriputta, are the ten Tathāgata's powers, by virtue of which the Tathāgata claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

149. ‘‘Yo kho maṃ, sāriputta, evaṃ jānantaṃ evaṃ passantaṃ evaṃ vadeyya – ‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttarimanussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso; takkapariyāhataṃ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṃ deseti vīmaṃsānucaritaṃ sayaṃpaṭibhāna’nti, taṃ, sāriputta, vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, bhikkhu sīlasampanno samādhisampanno paññāsampanno diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṃ ārādheyya, evaṃ sampadamidaṃ, sāriputta, vadāmi. Taṃ vācaṃ appahāya, taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye.

149.Sāriputta, if anyone, who knows me thus and sees me thus, were to say: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superior human states, no distinction in knowledge and vision truly noble; the ascetic Gotama teaches a doctrine hammered out by reasoning, followed by investigation, self-devised’—without abandoning that speech, that thought, and that view, he is deposited in hell just as if he had been carried there. Just as, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu accomplished in virtue, accomplished in samādhi, and accomplished in wisdom might attain the highest goal in this very life, so too, Sāriputta, do I declare this outcome. Without abandoning that speech, that thought, and that view, he is deposited in hell just as if he had been carried there.

150. ‘‘Cattārimāni, sāriputta, tathāgatassa vesārajjāni yehi vesārajjehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti. Katamāni cattāri?

150.Sāriputta, there are these four fearlessnesses of the Tathāgata, by virtue of which the Tathāgata claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma. What are the four?

‘‘‘Sammāsambuddhassa te paṭijānato ime dhammā anabhisambuddhā’ti. Tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessatīti nimittametaṃ, sāriputta, na samanupassāmi. Etamahaṃ [etampahaṃ (sī. pī.)], sāriputta, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi.

‘As you claim to be a Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, these things have not been fully awakened to by you’—that any ascetic or brahmin, god or Māra or Brahmā, or anyone in the world would rightly challenge me on this point according to the Dhamma—such a ground, Sāriputta, I do not perceive. Not perceiving such a ground, Sāriputta, I dwell having attained security, attained fearlessness, attained self-confidence.

‘‘‘Khīṇāsavassa te paṭijānato ime āsavā aparikkhīṇā’ti. Tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessatīti nimittametaṃ, sāriputta, na samanupassāmi. Etamahaṃ, sāriputta, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi.

‘As you claim to be one whose taints are destroyed, these taints are not destroyed in you’—that any ascetic or brahmin, god or Māra or Brahmā, or anyone in the world would rightly challenge me on this point according to the Dhamma—such a ground, Sāriputta, I do not perceive. Not perceiving such a ground, Sāriputta, I dwell having attained security, attained fearlessness, attained self-confidence.

‘‘‘Ye kho pana te antarāyikā dhammā vuttā, te paṭisevato nālaṃ antarāyāyā’ti. Tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessatīti nimittametaṃ, sāriputta, na samanupassāmi. Etamahaṃ, sāriputta, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi.

‘Those things declared by me to be obstructive are not capable of obstructing one who engages in them’—that any ascetic or brahmin, god or Māra or Brahmā, or anyone in the world would rightly challenge me on this point according to the Dhamma—such a ground, Sāriputta, I do not perceive. Not perceiving such a ground, Sāriputta, I dwell having attained security, attained fearlessness, attained self-confidence.

‘‘‘Yassa kho pana te atthāya dhammo desito, so na niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’ti. Tatra vata maṃ samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā devo vā māro vā brahmā vā koci vā lokasmiṃ sahadhammena paṭicodessatī’ti nimittametaṃ, sāriputta, na samanupassāmi. Etamahaṃ, sāriputta, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi.

‘The Dhamma taught by me for a specific purpose does not lead one who practices it to the complete destruction of suffering’—that any ascetic or brahmin, god or Māra or Brahmā, or anyone in the world would rightly challenge me on this point according to the Dhamma—such a ground, Sāriputta, I do not perceive. Not perceiving such a ground, Sāriputta, I dwell having attained security, attained fearlessness, attained self-confidence.

‘‘Imāni kho, sāriputta, cattāri tathāgatassa vesārajjāni yehi vesārajjehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṃ ṭhānaṃ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṃ nadati, brahmacakkaṃ pavatteti.

These, Sāriputta, are the four fearlessnesses of the Tathāgata, by virtue of which the Tathāgata claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

‘‘Yo kho maṃ, sāriputta, evaṃ jānantaṃ evaṃ passantaṃ evaṃ vadeyya – ‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttarimanussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso, takkapariyāhataṃ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṃ deseti vīmaṃsānucaritaṃ sayaṃpaṭibhāna’nti, taṃ, sāriputta, vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, bhikkhu sīlasampanno samādhisampanno paññāsampanno diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṃ ārādheyya, evaṃ sampadamidaṃ, sāriputta, vadāmi. Taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye.

Whoever, Sāriputta, knowing me thus, seeing me thus, should say: 'The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman states, no distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones; the ascetic Gotama teaches a doctrine hammered out by reasoning, followed by his own investigation, a product of his own intuition'—without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, that person, Sāriputta, is deposited in hell, just as if he had been carried there. Just as, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu accomplished in virtue, accomplished in samādhi, and accomplished in wisdom might here and now attain arahantship, so I declare this attainment, Sāriputta. Without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, that person is deposited in hell, just as if he had been carried there.

151. ‘‘Aṭṭha kho imā, sāriputta, parisā. Katamā aṭṭha? Khattiyaparisā, brāhmaṇaparisā, gahapatiparisā, samaṇaparisā, cātumahārājikaparisā [cātummahārājikā (sī. syā. pī.)], tāvatiṃsaparisā, māraparisā, brahmaparisā – imā kho, sāriputta, aṭṭha parisā. Imehi kho, sāriputta, catūhi vesārajjehi samannāgato tathāgato imā aṭṭha parisā upasaṅkamati ajjhogāhati. Abhijānāmi kho panāhaṃ, sāriputta, anekasataṃ khattiyaparisaṃ upasaṅkamitā. Tatrapi mayā sannisinnapubbañceva, sallapitapubbañca, sākacchā ca samāpajjitapubbā. Tatra vata maṃ bhayaṃ vā sārajjaṃ vā okkamissatīti nimittametaṃ, sāriputta, na samanupassāmi. Etamahaṃ, sāriputta, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi.

151.Sāriputta, there are these eight assemblies. Which eight? The assembly of nobles, the assembly of brahmins, the assembly of householders, the assembly of ascetics, the assembly of the Four Great Kings, the assembly of the Thirty-three, the assembly of Māra, the assembly of Brahmā—these, Sāriputta, are the eight assemblies. Endowed with these four grounds for confidence, the Tathāgata approaches and enters these eight assemblies. I recall, Sāriputta, having approached many hundreds of assemblies of nobles. There I had sat with them before, conversed with them before, and engaged in discussions before. That any fear or timidity should overcome me—this, Sāriputta, is a sign I do not perceive. Not perceiving such a sign, Sāriputta, I dwell having attained security, having attained fearlessness, having attained confidence.

‘‘Abhijānāmi kho panāhaṃ, sāriputta, anekasataṃ brāhmaṇaparisaṃ…pe… gahapatiparisaṃ… samaṇaparisaṃ… cātumahārājikaparisaṃ… tāvatiṃsaparisaṃ… māraparisaṃ… brahmaparisaṃ upasaṅkamitā. Tatrapi mayā sannisinnapubbañceva, sallapitapubbañca, sākacchā ca samāpajjitapubbā. Tatra vata maṃ bhayaṃ vā sārajjaṃ vā okkamissatīti nimittametaṃ, sāriputta, na samanupassāmi. Etamahaṃ, sāriputta, nimittaṃ asamanupassanto khemappatto abhayappatto vesārajjappatto viharāmi.

I recall, Sāriputta, having approached many hundreds of assemblies of brahmins... assemblies of householders... assemblies of ascetics... assemblies of the Four Great Kings... assemblies of the Thirty-Three... assemblies of Māra... assemblies of Brahmā. There I had sat with them before, conversed with them before, and engaged in discussions before. That any fear or timidity should overcome me—this, Sāriputta, is a sign I do not perceive. Not perceiving such a sign, Sāriputta, I dwell having attained security, having attained fearlessness, having attained confidence.

‘‘Yo kho maṃ, sāriputta, evaṃ jānantaṃ evaṃ passantaṃ evaṃ vadeyya – ‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttarimanussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso, takkapariyāhataṃ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṃ deseti vīmaṃsānucaritaṃ sayaṃpaṭibhāna’nti, taṃ, sāriputta, vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, bhikkhu sīlasampanno samādhisampanno paññāsampanno diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṃ ārādheyya, evaṃ sampadamidaṃ, sāriputta, vadāmi. Taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye.

Whoever, Sāriputta, knowing me thus, seeing me thus, should say: 'The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman states, no distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones; the ascetic Gotama teaches a doctrine hammered out by reasoning, followed by his own investigation, a product of his own intuition'—without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, that person, Sāriputta, is deposited in hell, just as if he had been carried there. Just as, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu accomplished in virtue, accomplished in samādhi, and accomplished in wisdom might here and now attain arahantship, so I declare this attainment, Sāriputta. Without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, that person is deposited in hell, just as if he had been carried there.

152. ‘‘Catasso kho imā, sāriputta, yoniyo. Katamā catasso? Aṇḍajā yoni, jalābujā yoni, saṃsedajā yoni, opapātikā yoni. Katamā ca, sāriputta, aṇḍajā yoni? Ye kho te, sāriputta, sattā aṇḍakosaṃ abhinibbhijja jāyanti – ayaṃ vuccati, sāriputta, aṇḍajā yoni. Katamā ca, sāriputta, jalābujā yoni? Ye kho te, sāriputta, sattā vatthikosaṃ abhinibbhijja jāyanti – ayaṃ vuccati, sāriputta, jalābujā yoni. Katamā ca, sāriputta, saṃsedajā yoni? Ye kho te, sāriputta, sattā pūtimacche vā jāyanti pūtikuṇape vā pūtikummāse vā candanikāye vā oḷigalle vā jāyanti – ayaṃ vuccati, sāriputta, saṃsedajā yoni. Katamā ca, sāriputta, opapātikā yoni? Devā, nerayikā, ekacce ca manussā, ekacce ca vinipātikā – ayaṃ vuccati, sāriputta, opapātikā yoni. Imā kho, sāriputta, catasso yoniyo.

152.Sāriputta, there are these four modes of generation. What are the four? Egg-born generation, womb-born generation, moisture-born generation, and spontaneous generation. And what, Sāriputta, is egg-born generation? Those beings who are born by breaking through an eggshell—this is called egg-born generation, Sāriputta. And what, Sāriputta, is womb-born generation? Those beings who are born by breaking through a membrane—this is called womb-born generation, Sāriputta. And what, Sāriputta, is moisture-born generation? Those beings who are born in rotten fish, or in a rotten corpse, or in rotten dough, or in a cesspool, or in a sewer—this is called moisture-born generation, Sāriputta. And what, Sāriputta, is spontaneous generation? Gods, hell-beings, certain humans, and certain beings in the states of deprivation—this is called spontaneous generation, Sāriputta. These, Sāriputta, are the four modes of generation.

‘‘Yo kho maṃ, sāriputta, evaṃ jānantaṃ evaṃ passantaṃ evaṃ vadeyya – ‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttarimanussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso, takkapariyāhataṃ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṃ deseti vīmaṃsānucaritaṃ sayaṃpaṭibhāna’nti, taṃ, sāriputta, vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, bhikkhu sīlasampanno samādhisampanno paññāsampanno diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṃ ārādheyya, evaṃ sampadamidaṃ, sāriputta, vadāmi. Taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye.

Whoever, Sāriputta, knowing me thus, seeing me thus, should say: 'The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman states, no distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones; the ascetic Gotama teaches a doctrine hammered out by reasoning, followed by his own investigation, a product of his own intuition'—without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, that person, Sāriputta, is deposited in hell, just as if he had been carried there. Just as, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu accomplished in virtue, accomplished in samādhi, and accomplished in wisdom might here and now attain arahantship, so I declare this attainment, Sāriputta. Without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, that person is deposited in hell, just as if he had been carried there.

153. ‘‘Pañca kho imā, sāriputta, gatiyo. Katamā pañca? Nirayo, tiracchānayoni, pettivisayo, manussā, devā. Nirayañcāhaṃ, sāriputta, pajānāmi, nirayagāmiñca maggaṃ, nirayagāminiñca paṭipadaṃ; yathā paṭipanno ca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati tañca pajānāmi. Tiracchānayoniñcāhaṃ, sāriputta, pajānāmi, tiracchānayonigāmiñca maggaṃ, tiracchānayonigāminiñca paṭipadaṃ; yathā paṭipanno ca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā tiracchānayoniṃ upapajjati tañca pajānāmi. Pettivisayaṃ cāhaṃ, sāriputta, pajānāmi, pettivisayagāmiñca maggaṃ, pettivisayagāminiñca paṭipadaṃ; yathā paṭipanno ca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pettivisayaṃ upapajjati tañca pajānāmi. Manusse cāhaṃ, sāriputta, pajānāmi, manussalokagāmiñca maggaṃ, manussalokagāminiñca paṭipadaṃ; yathā paṭipanno ca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manussesu upapajjati tañca pajānāmi. Deve cāhaṃ, sāriputta, pajānāmi, devalokagāmiñca maggaṃ, devalokagāminiñca paṭipadaṃ; yathā paṭipanno ca kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati tañca pajānāmi. Nibbānañcāhaṃ, sāriputta, pajānāmi, nibbānagāmiñca maggaṃ, nibbānagāminiñca paṭipadaṃ; yathā paṭipanno ca āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati tañca pajānāmi.

153.Sāriputta, there are these five destinations. Which five? Hell, the animal realm, the realm of the departed spirits, humans, and devas. I understand, Sāriputta, hell and the path and practice that lead to hell. I understand how one who practices in such a way, upon the breakup of the body after death, is reborn in a state of deprivation, a bad destination, the lower world, hell. I understand, Sāriputta, the animal realm and the path and practice that lead to the animal realm. I understand how one who practices in such a way, upon the breakup of the body after death, is reborn in the animal realm. I understand, Sāriputta, the realm of the departed spirits and the path and practice that lead to the realm of the departed spirits. I understand how one who practices in such a way, upon the breakup of the body after death, is reborn in the realm of the departed spirits. I understand, Sāriputta, humans and the path and practice that lead to the human world. I understand how one who practices in such a way, upon the breakup of the body after death, is reborn among humans. I understand, Sāriputta, the devas and the path and practice that lead to the deva world. I understand how one who practices in such a way, upon the breakup of the body after death, is reborn in a happy destination, in the heavenly world. I understand, Sāriputta, Nibbāna and the path and practice that lead to Nibbāna. I understand how one who practices in such a way, through the destruction of the taints, having realized for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life, enters and dwells in the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom.

154. ‘‘Idhāhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannaṃ, ekantadukkhā tibbā kaṭukā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, aṅgārakāsu sādhikaporisā pūrā aṅgārānaṃ vītaccikānaṃ vītadhūmānaṃ. Atha puriso āgaccheyya ghammābhitatto ghammapareto kilanto tasito pipāsito ekāyanena maggena tameva aṅgārakāsuṃ paṇidhāya. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso disvā evaṃ vadeyya – ‘tathāyaṃ bhavaṃ puriso paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā imaṃyeva aṅgārakāsuṃ āgamissatī’ti. Tamenaṃ passeyya aparena samayena tassā aṅgārakāsuyā patitaṃ, ekantadukkhā tibbā kaṭukā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Evameva kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapannaṃ, ekantadukkhā tibbā kaṭukā vedanā vedayamānaṃ.

154.“Here, Sāriputta, with my mind encompassing the minds of others, I understand a certain person thus: ‘This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear in the plane of misery, a bad destination, the state of perdition, in hell.’ Then later, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, I see him, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared in the plane of misery, a bad destination, the state of perdition, in hell, experiencing exclusively painful, intense, and sharp feelings. “Suppose, Sāriputta, there were a pit of glowing coals, deeper than a man’s height, full of coals that were flameless and smokeless. Then a man would come along, scorched by the heat, overcome by the heat, exhausted, thirsty, and parched, traveling along a single path heading straight for that very pit of coals. A clear-sighted man, seeing him, would say: ‘This man is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that he will come to this very pit of coals.’ Then later he would see that man fallen into that pit of coals, experiencing exclusively painful, intense, and sharp feelings. “In the same way, Sāriputta, with my mind encompassing the minds of others, I understand a certain person here thus: ‘This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear in the plane of misery, a bad destination, the state of perdition, in hell.’ Then later, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, I see him, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared in the plane of misery, a bad destination, the state of perdition, in hell, experiencing exclusively painful, intense, and sharp feelings.

‘‘Idha panāhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā tiracchānayoniṃ upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā tiracchānayoniṃ upapannaṃ, dukkhā tibbā kaṭukā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, gūthakūpo sādhikaporiso, pūro gūthassa. Atha puriso āgaccheyya ghammābhitatto ghammapareto kilanto tasito pipāsito ekāyanena maggena tameva gūthakūpaṃ paṇidhāya. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso disvā evaṃ vadeyya – ‘tathāyaṃ bhavaṃ puriso paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho yathā imaṃyeva gūthakūpaṃ āgamissatī’ti. Tamenaṃ passeyya aparena samayena tasmiṃ gūthakūpe patitaṃ, dukkhā tibbā kaṭukā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Evameva kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā tiracchānayoniṃ upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā tiracchānayoniṃ upapannaṃ, dukkhā tibbā kaṭukā vedanā vedayamānaṃ.

“Here, Sāriputta, with my mind encompassing the minds of others, I understand a certain person thus: ‘This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear in the animal realm.’ Then later, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, I see him, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared in the animal realm, experiencing painful, intense, and sharp feelings. “Suppose, Sāriputta, there were a cesspit deeper than a man’s height, full of filth. Then a man would come along, scorched by the heat, overcome by the heat, exhausted, thirsty, and parched, traveling along a single path heading straight for that very cesspit. A clear-sighted man, seeing him, would say: ‘This man is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that he will come to this very cesspit.’ Then later he would see that man fallen into that cesspit, experiencing painful, intense, and sharp feelings. “In the same way, Sāriputta, with my mind encompassing the minds of others, I understand a certain person here thus: ‘This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear in the animal realm.’ Then later, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, I see him, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared in the animal realm, experiencing painful, intense, and sharp feelings.

‘‘Idha panāhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pettivisayaṃ upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pettivisayaṃ upapannaṃ, dukkhabahulā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, rukkho visame bhūmibhāge jāto tanupattapalāso kabaracchāyo. Atha puriso āgaccheyya ghammābhitatto ghammapareto kilanto tasito pipāsito ekāyanena maggena tameva rukkhaṃ paṇidhāya. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso disvā evaṃ vadeyya – ‘tathāyaṃ bhavaṃ puriso paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā imaṃyeva rukkhaṃ āgamissatī’ti. Tamenaṃ passeyya, aparena samayena tassa rukkhassa chāyāya nisinnaṃ vā nipannaṃ vā dukkhabahulā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Evameva kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pettivisayaṃ upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā pettivisayaṃ upapannaṃ, dukkhabahulā vedanā vedayamānaṃ.

“Here, Sāriputta, with my mind encompassing the minds of others, I understand a certain person thus: ‘This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear in the realm of ghosts.’ Then later, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, I see him, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared in the realm of ghosts, experiencing mostly painful feelings. “Suppose, Sāriputta, a tree were growing on uneven ground, with sparse leaves and patchy shade. Then a man would come along, scorched by the heat, overcome by the heat, exhausted, thirsty, and parched, traveling along a single path heading straight for that very tree. A clear-sighted man, seeing him, would say: ‘This man is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that he will come to this very tree.’ Then later he would see that man sitting or lying in the shade of that tree, experiencing mostly painful feelings. “In the same way, Sāriputta, with my mind encompassing the minds of others, I understand a certain person here thus: ‘This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear in the realm of ghosts.’ Then later, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, I see him, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared in the realm of ghosts, experiencing mostly painful feelings.

‘‘Idha panāhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manussesu upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manussesu upapannaṃ, sukhabahulā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, rukkho same bhūmibhāge jāto bahalapattapalāso sandacchāyo [saṇḍacchāyo (syā.), santacchāyo (ka.)]. Atha puriso āgaccheyya ghammābhitatto ghammapareto kilanto tasito pipāsito ekāyanena maggena tameva rukkhaṃ paṇidhāya. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso disvā evaṃ vadeyya – ‘tathāyaṃ bhavaṃ puriso paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā imameva rukkhaṃ āgamissatī’ti. Tamenaṃ passeyya aparena samayena tassa rukkhassa chāyāya nisinnaṃ vā nipannaṃ vā sukhabahulā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Evameva kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manussesu upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā manussesu upapannaṃ, sukhabahulā vedanā vedayamānaṃ.

“Here, Sāriputta, with my mind encompassing the minds of others, I understand a certain person thus: ‘This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear among humans.’ Then later, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, I see him, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared among humans, experiencing feelings that are mostly pleasant. “Suppose, Sāriputta, a tree were growing on level ground, with dense foliage and thick shade. Then a man would come along, scorched by the heat, overcome by the heat, exhausted, thirsty, and parched, traveling along a single path heading straight for that very tree. A clear-sighted man, seeing him, would say: ‘This man is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that he will come to this very tree.’ Then later he would see that man sitting or lying in the shade of that tree, experiencing feelings that are mostly pleasant. “In the same way, Sāriputta, with my mind encompassing the minds of others, I understand a certain person here thus: ‘This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a way, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear among humans.’ Then later, with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, I see him, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared among humans, experiencing feelings that are mostly pleasant.

‘‘Idha panāhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissatī’ti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapannaṃ, ekantasukhā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, pāsādo, tatrāssa kūṭāgāraṃ ullittāvalittaṃ nivātaṃ phusitaggaḷaṃ pihitavātapānaṃ. Tatrāssa pallaṅko gonakatthato paṭikatthato paṭalikatthato kadalimigapavarapaccattharaṇo sauttaracchado ubhatolohitakūpadhāno. Atha puriso āgaccheyya ghammābhitatto ghammapareto kilanto tasito pipāsito ekāyanena maggena tameva pāsādaṃ paṇidhāya. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso disvā evaṃ vadeyya – ‘tathāyaṃ bhavaṃ puriso paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā imaṃyeva pāsādaṃ āgamissatī’ti. Tamenaṃ passeyya aparena samayena tasmiṃ pāsāde tasmiṃ kūṭāgāre tasmiṃ pallaṅke nisinnaṃ vā nipannaṃ vā ekantasukhā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Evameva kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapannaṃ, ekantasukhā vedanā vedayamānaṃ.

"Here, Sāriputta, I understand a certain person by encompassing his mind with my mind thus: 'This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a manner, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, in a heavenly world.' Then, at a later time, I see him with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, reappeared with the breakup of the body, after death, in a happy destination, in a heavenly world, experiencing feelings that are exclusively pleasant. Just as, Sāriputta, there might be a palace, and in it an upper chamber, plastered inside and out, sheltered from the wind, with bolts fastened and windows closed. In it there is a couch spread with a woolen rug, a white woolen rug, a rug with variegated designs, a finest antelope hide, with a canopy above, and with red cushions for head and feet. Then a man might come along, scorched and exhausted by the heat, weary, thirsty, and parched, traveling along a single path, heading straight for that very palace. A man with good eyesight, seeing him, would say: 'This worthy man is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a manner, and has embarked on such a path, that he will arrive at this very palace.' Then, at a later time, he would see him seated or lying in that palace, in that upper chamber, on that couch, experiencing feelings that are exclusively pleasant. In the same way, Sāriputta, I understand a certain person by encompassing his mind with my mind thus: 'This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a manner, and has embarked on such a path, that with the breakup of the body, after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, in a heavenly world.' Then, at a later time, I see him with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, reappeared with the breakup of the body, after death, in a happy destination, in a heavenly world, experiencing feelings that are exclusively pleasant."

‘‘Idha panāhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaccaṃ puggalaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā āsavānaṃ khayā anāsaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharissatīti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharantaṃ, ekantasukhā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, pokkharaṇī acchodakā sātodakā sītodakā setakā supatitthā ramaṇīyā. Avidūre cassā tibbo vanasaṇḍo. Atha puriso āgaccheyya ghammābhitatto ghammapareto kilanto tasito pipāsito ekāyanena maggena tameva pokkharaṇiṃ paṇidhāya. Tamenaṃ cakkhumā puriso disvā evaṃ vadeyya – ‘tathā bhavaṃ puriso paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā imaṃyeva pokkharaṇiṃ āgamissatī’ti. Tamenaṃ passeyya aparena samayena taṃ pokkharaṇiṃ ogāhetvā nhāyitvā ca pivitvā ca sabbadarathakilamathapariḷāhaṃ paṭippassambhetvā paccuttaritvā tasmiṃ vanasaṇḍe nisinnaṃ vā nipannaṃ vā, ekantasukhā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Evameva kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṃ puggalaṃ evaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi – tathāyaṃ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṃ samārūḷho, yathā āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharissatī’ti. Tamenaṃ passāmi aparena samayena āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharantaṃ, ekantasukhā vedanā vedayamānaṃ. Imā kho, sāriputta, pañca gatiyo.

"Here, Sāriputta, I understand a certain person by encompassing his mind with my mind thus: 'This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a manner, and has embarked on such a path, that through the destruction of the taints, he will in this very life realize for himself the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, having directly known and attained it, and will dwell therein.' Then, at a later time, I see that person, through the destruction of the taints, realizing for himself the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom in this very life, and dwelling therein, experiencing feelings that are exclusively pleasant. Just as, Sāriputta, there might be a lotus pond with clear, pleasant, cool, sweet water, with good fords, delightful. Not far from it was a dense forest grove. Then a man might come along, scorched and exhausted by the heat, weary, thirsty, and parched, traveling along a single path, heading straight for that very lotus pond. A man with good eyesight, seeing him, would say: 'This worthy man is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a manner, and has embarked on such a path that he will come to this very lotus pond.' Then, at a later time, he would see that man having plunged into the pond, bathed, drunk, and with all his fatigue, distress, and fever subsided, come out and sit or lie down in that forest grove, experiencing feelings that are exclusively pleasant. In the same way, Sāriputta, I understand a certain person by encompassing his mind with my mind thus: 'This person is practicing in such a way, conducting himself in such a manner, and has embarked on such a path that, through the destruction of the taints, he will in this very life realize for himself the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, having directly known and attained it, and will dwell therein.' Then, at a later time, I see that person, through the destruction of the taints, realizing for himself the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom in this very life, and dwelling therein, experiencing feelings that are exclusively pleasant. These, Sāriputta, are the five destinations."

‘‘Yo kho maṃ, sāriputta, evaṃ jānantaṃ evaṃ passantaṃ evaṃ vadeyya – ‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttarimanussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso; takkapariyāhataṃ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṃ deseti vīmaṃsānucaritaṃ sayaṃpaṭibhāna’nti taṃ, sāriputta, vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, bhikkhu sīlasampanno samādhisampanno paññāsampanno diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṃ ārādheyya, evaṃ sampadamidaṃ, sāriputta, vadāmi ‘taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṃ nikkhitto evaṃ niraye’.

"Sāriputta, whoever, knowing me thus and seeing me thus, should say: 'The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman states, no distinction of noble knowledge and vision; the ascetic Gotama teaches a doctrine hammered out by reasoning, followed up by investigation, self-devised'—Sāriputta, without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, he is deposited in hell just as if he had been carried there. Just as, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu accomplished in virtue, accomplished in samādhi, accomplished in wisdom, might attain final knowledge in this very life, so, Sāriputta, do I declare this to be the case: 'Without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, he is deposited in hell just as if he had been carried there.'"

155. ‘‘Abhijānāmi kho panāhaṃ, sāriputta, caturaṅgasamannāgataṃ brahmacariyaṃ caritā [caritvā (ka.)] – tapassī sudaṃ homi paramatapassī, lūkho sudaṃ [lūkhassudaṃ (sī. pī.)] homi paramalūkho, jegucchī sudaṃ homi paramajegucchī, pavivitto sudaṃ [pavivittassudaṃ (sī. pī.)] homi paramapavivitto. Tatrāssu me idaṃ, sāriputta, tapassitāya hoti – acelako homi muttācāro hatthāpalekhano [hatthāvalekhano (syā.)], na ehibhaddantiko na tiṭṭhabhaddantiko; nābhihaṭaṃ na uddissakataṃ na nimantanaṃ sādiyāmi. So na kumbhimukhā paṭiggaṇhāmi, na kaḷopimukhā paṭiggaṇhāmi, na eḷakamantaraṃ, na daṇḍamantaraṃ, na musalamantaraṃ, na dvinnaṃ bhuñjamānānaṃ, na gabbhiniyā, na pāyamānāya [pāyantiyā (ka.)], na purisantaragatāya, na saṅkittīsu, na yattha sā upaṭṭhito hoti, na yattha makkhikā saṇḍasaṇḍacārinī; na macchaṃ na maṃsaṃ na suraṃ na merayaṃ na thusodakaṃ pivāmi; so ekāgāriko vā homi ekālopiko, dvāgāriko vā homi dvālopiko…pe… sattāgāriko vā homi sattālopiko; ekissāpi dattiyā yāpemi, dvīhipi dattīhi yāpemi…pe… sattahipi dattīhi yāpemi; ekāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāremi, dvīhikampi āhāraṃ āhāremi…pe… sattāhikampi āhāraṃ āhāremi; iti evarūpaṃ addhamāsikampi pariyāyabhattabhojanānuyogamanuyutto viharāmi.

155."Sāriputta, I recall having lived a holy life endowed with four factors: I was an ascetic, foremost among ascetics; I was rough, foremost among the rough; I was disgusted, foremost among the disgusted; I was secluded, foremost among the secluded. There, Sāriputta, was my asceticism: I was naked, of unrestrained conduct, licking my hands; I did not come when asked 'Come here', nor did I stop when asked 'Stay here'. I did not accept food brought to me, nor food specially prepared, nor food offered on invitation. I did not receive food from the mouth of a pot, nor from the mouth of a food-container, nor across a threshold, nor across a stick, nor across a pestle, nor from two people eating, nor from a pregnant woman, nor from a nursing woman, nor from a woman living with a man, nor from a place where food was collected, nor from where a dog was standing by, nor from where flies were swarming. I ate no fish, no meat, drank no liquor, no wine, no sour gruel. I lived on food from one house only, taking one mouthful; or from two houses only, taking two mouthfuls... up to seven houses only, taking seven mouthfuls. I subsisted on one portion, or on two portions... up to seven portions. I took food once a day, or once every two days... up to once every seven days. Thus I lived engaged in the practice of eating food at regular intervals, even up to half a month."

‘‘So sākabhakkho vā homi, sāmākabhakkho vā homi, nīvārabhakkho vā homi, daddulabhakkho vā homi, haṭabhakkho vā homi, kaṇabhakkho vā homi, ācāmabhakkho vā homi, piññākabhakkho vā homi, tiṇabhakkho vā homi, gomayabhakkho vā homi, vanamūlaphalāhāro yāpemi pavattaphalabhojī.

"I ate greens, or millet, or wild rice, or leather scraps, or moss and algae, or bran, or rice gruel, or oil-cake, or grass, or cow dung. I subsisted on forest roots and fruits, feeding on fallen fruits."

‘‘So sāṇānipi dhāremi, masāṇānipi dhāremi, chavadussānipi dhāremi, paṃsukūlānipi dhāremi, tirīṭānipi dhāremi, ajinampi dhāremi, ajinakkhipampi dhāremi, kusacīrampi dhāremi, vākacīrampi dhāremi, phalakacīrampi dhāremi, kesakambalampi dhāremi, vāḷakambalampi dhāremi, ulūkapakkhampi dhāremi; kesamassulocakopi homi kesamassulocanānuyogamanuyutto; ubbhaṭṭhakopi homi āsanapaṭikkhitto; ukkuṭikopi homi ukkuṭikappadhānamanuyutto; kaṇṭakāpassayikopi homi kaṇṭakāpassaye seyyaṃ kappemi [imassānantare aññopi koci pāṭhapadeso aññesu ājīvakavatadīpakasuttesu dissati]; sāyatatiyakampi udakorohanānuyogamanuyutto viharāmi – iti evarūpaṃ anekavihitaṃ kāyassa ātāpanaparitāpanānuyogamanuyutto viharāmi. Idaṃsu me, sāriputta, tapassitāya hoti.

"I wore robes of hemp, or robes of mixed fibers, or shroud cloths, or rag-robes, or bark garments, or an antelope hide, or a hide with the hoofs, or a kusa grass garment, or a bark garment, or a wooden-splint garment, or a blanket of human hair, or a blanket of horsehair, or a garment of owl's feathers. I was one who plucked out hair and beard, devoted to the practice of plucking out hair and beard. I was one who stood upright, rejecting seats. I was one who squatted, devoted to the practice of squatting exertion. I was one who used a bed of thorns, and I made my bed on a bed of thorns. I lived devoted to the practice of immersing myself in water three times daily, including the evening. Thus I lived devoted to various kinds of self-mortification, tormenting the body. This, Sāriputta, was my asceticism."

156. ‘‘Tatrāssu me idaṃ, sāriputta, lūkhasmiṃ hoti – nekavassagaṇikaṃ rajojallaṃ kāye sannicitaṃ hoti papaṭikajātaṃ. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, tindukakhāṇu nekavassagaṇiko sannicito hoti papaṭikajāto, evamevāssu me, sāriputta, nekavassagaṇikaṃ rajojallaṃ kāye sannicitaṃ hoti papaṭikajātaṃ. Tassa mayhaṃ, sāriputta, na evaṃ hoti – ‘aho vatāhaṃ imaṃ rajojallaṃ pāṇinā parimajjeyyaṃ, aññe vā pana me imaṃ rajojallaṃ pāṇinā parimajjeyyu’nti. Evampi me, sāriputta, na hoti. Idaṃsu me, sāriputta, lūkhasmiṃ hoti.

156."Here, Sāriputta, this was my harsh practice: the dust and dirt accumulated on my body over many years, forming a crust. Just as, Sāriputta, a tinduka tree stump accumulates a crust over many years, so too did the dust and dirt accumulate on my body over many years, forming a crust. It never occurred to me, Sāriputta, ‘Oh, that I might wipe away this dust and dirt with my hand, or that others might wipe it away for me.’ Even this, Sāriputta, did not occur to me. This, Sāriputta, was my harsh practice."

‘‘Tatrāssu me idaṃ, sāriputta, jegucchismiṃ hoti – so kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, satova abhikkamāmi, satova paṭikkamāmi, yāva udakabindumhipi me dayā paccupaṭṭhitā hoti – ‘māhaṃ khuddake pāṇe visamagate saṅghātaṃ āpādesi’nti. Idaṃsu me, sāriputta, jegucchismiṃ hoti.

"Here, Sāriputta, this was my scrupulousness: mindful, I went forward; mindful, I went back. Even with regard to a drop of water, compassion was present in me, thinking, ‘Let me not injure tiny creatures who are in a difficult place.’ This, Sāriputta, was my scrupulousness."

‘‘Tatrāssu me idaṃ, sāriputta, pavivittasmiṃ hoti – so kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, aññataraṃ araññāyatanaṃ ajjhogāhetvā viharāmi. Yadā passāmi gopālakaṃ vā pasupālakaṃ vā tiṇahārakaṃ vā kaṭṭhahārakaṃ vā vanakammikaṃ vā, vanena vanaṃ gahanena gahanaṃ ninnena ninnaṃ thalena thalaṃ saṃpatāmi [papatāmi (sī. syā. pī.)]. Taṃ kissa hetu? Mā maṃ te addasaṃsu ahañca mā te addasanti. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, āraññako mago manusse disvā vanena vanaṃ gahanena gahanaṃ ninnena ninnaṃ thalena thalaṃ saṃpatati, evameva kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, yadā passāmi gopālakaṃ vā pasupālakaṃ vā tiṇahārakaṃ vā kaṭṭhahārakaṃ vā vanakammikaṃ vā vanena vanaṃ gahanena gahanaṃ ninnena ninnaṃ thalena thalaṃ saṃpatāmi. Taṃ kissa hetu? Mā maṃ te addasaṃsu ahañca mā te addasanti. Idaṃsu me, sāriputta, pavivittasmiṃ hoti.

"Here, Sāriputta, this is how I lived in seclusion: I would dwell having entered some forest haunt. Whenever I saw a cowherd, a shepherd, a grass-cutter, a wood-gatherer, or a forest worker, I would rush from forest to forest, from thicket to thicket, from low ground to low ground, from high ground to high ground. Why was that? So they wouldn’t see me, and I wouldn’t see them. Just as, Sāriputta, a wild deer, seeing humans, rushes from forest to forest, from thicket to thicket, from low ground to low ground, from high ground to high ground, so too, Sāriputta, whenever I saw a cowherd, a shepherd, a grass-cutter, a wood-gatherer, or a forest worker, I would rush from forest to forest, from thicket to thicket, from low ground to low ground, from high ground to high ground. Why was that? So they wouldn’t see me, and I wouldn’t see them. This, Sāriputta, is how I lived in seclusion."

‘‘So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, ye te goṭṭhā paṭṭhitagāvo apagatagopālakā, tattha catukkuṇḍiko upasaṅkamitvā yāni tāni vacchakānaṃ taruṇakānaṃ dhenupakānaṃ gomayāni tāni sudaṃ āhāremi. Yāvakīvañca me, sāriputta, sakaṃ muttakarīsaṃ apariyādinnaṃ hoti, sakaṃyeva sudaṃ muttakarīsaṃ āhāremi. Idaṃsu me, sāriputta, mahāvikaṭabhojanasmiṃ hoti.

"I, Sāriputta, would approach on all fours a cattle pen where the cows had departed and the cowherd was gone, and there I would feed on the dung of the young calves, the tender ones, the nursing ones. And as long as my own urine and feces were not depleted, I would feed on my own urine and feces. This, Sāriputta, was my practice of extreme eating."

157. ‘‘So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, aññataraṃ bhiṃsanakaṃ vanasaṇḍaṃ ajjhogāhetvā viharāmi. Tatrāssudaṃ, sāriputta, bhiṃsanakassa vanasaṇḍassa bhiṃsanakatasmiṃ hoti – yo koci avītarāgo taṃ vanasaṇḍaṃ pavisati, yebhuyyena lomāni haṃsanti. So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, yā tā rattiyo sītā hemantikā antaraṭṭhakā himapātasamayā [antaraṭṭhake himapātasamaye (sī. pī.)] tathārūpāsu rattīsu rattiṃ abbhokāse viharāmi, divā vanasaṇḍe; gimhānaṃ pacchime māse divā abbhokāse viharāmi, rattiṃ vanasaṇḍe. Apissu maṃ, sāriputta, ayaṃ anacchariyagāthā paṭibhāsi pubbe assutapubbā –

157."I, Sāriputta, would dwell, having plunged into a certain terrifying forest grove. There, in that terrifying forest grove, such was the terror that anyone not free from craving who entered it would, more often than not, have their hair stand on end. And I, Sāriputta, during those cold, wintry, in-between-harvest nights when snow was falling, would spend the night in the open and the day in the forest grove; and in the last month of summer I would spend the day in the open and the night in the forest grove. And then, Sāriputta, this verse, never heard before, occurred to me:"

‘‘Sotatto sosinno [sosīno (sī. pī. ka.), sosino (syā.), sosindo (saddanīti)] ceva, eko bhiṃsanake vane;Naggo na caggimāsīno, esanāpasuto munī’’ti.

‘Scorched and frozen, alone in a terrifying forest, naked, not sitting by a fire, the sage devoted to seeking.’

‘‘So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, susāne seyyaṃ kappemi chavaṭṭhikāni upadhāya. Apissu maṃ, sāriputta, gāmaṇḍalā [gomaṇḍalā (bahūsu) cariyāpiṭakaaṭṭhakathā oloketabbā] upasaṅkamitvā oṭṭhubhantipi, omuttentipi, paṃsukenapi okiranti, kaṇṇasotesupi salākaṃ pavesenti. Na kho panāhaṃ, sāriputta, abhijānāmi tesu pāpakaṃ cittaṃ uppādetā. Idaṃsu me, sāriputta, upekkhāvihārasmiṃ hoti.

"Then, Sāriputta, I arranged my sleeping place in a charnel ground, using bones as a pillow. And, Sāriputta, village youths would come up to me and spit at me, urinate on me, throw dust at me, and insert sticks into my ear canals. But, Sāriputta, I do not recall a single instance of generating an evil thought towards them. This, Sāriputta, was my abiding in equanimity."

158. ‘‘Santi kho pana, sāriputta, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘āhārena suddhī’ti. Te evamāhaṃsu – ‘kolehi yāpemā’ti. Te kolampi khādanti, kolacuṇṇampi khādanti, kolodakampi pivanti – anekavihitampi kolavikatiṃ paribhuñjanti. Abhijānāmi kho panāhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaṃyeva kolaṃ āhāraṃ āhāritā. Siyā kho pana te, sāriputta, evamassa – ‘mahā nūna tena samayena kolo ahosī’ti. Na kho panetaṃ, sāriputta, evaṃ daṭṭhabbaṃ. Tadāpi etaparamoyeva kolo ahosi seyyathāpi etarahi. Tassa mayhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaṃyeva kolaṃ āhāraṃ āhārayato adhimattakasimānaṃ patto kāyo hoti. Seyyathāpi nāma āsītikapabbāni vā kāḷapabbāni vā, evamevassu me aṅgapaccaṅgāni bhavanti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma oṭṭhapadaṃ, evamevassu me ānisadaṃ hoti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma vaṭṭanāvaḷī, evamevassu me piṭṭhikaṇṭako unnatāvanato hoti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma jarasālāya gopānasiyo oluggaviluggā bhavanti, evamevassu me phāsuḷiyo oluggaviluggā bhavanti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma gambhīre udapāne udakatārakā gambhīragatā okkhāyikā dissanti, evamevassu me akkhikūpesu akkhitārakā gambhīragatā okkhāyikā dissanti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma tittakālābuāmakacchinno vātātapena saṃphuṭito [samphusito (syā.), saṃpuṭito (pī. ka.) ettha saṃphuṭitoti saṅkucitoti attho] hoti sammilāto, evamevassu me sīsacchavi saṃphuṭitā hoti sammilātā tāyevappāhāratāya. So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, ‘udaracchaviṃ parimasissāmī’ti piṭṭhikaṇṭakaṃyeva pariggaṇhāmi, ‘piṭṭhikaṇṭakaṃ parimasissāmī’ti udaracchaviṃyeva pariggaṇhāmi, yāvassu me, sāriputta, udaracchavi piṭṭhikaṇṭakaṃ allīnā hoti tāyevappāhāratāya. So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, ‘vaccaṃ vā muttaṃ vā karissāmī’ti tattheva avakujjo papatāmi tāyevappāhāratāya. So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, tameva kāyaṃ assāsento pāṇinā gattāni anomajjāmi. Tassa mayhaṃ, sāriputta, pāṇinā gattāni anomajjato pūtimūlāni lomāni kāyasmā patanti tāyevappāhāratāya.

158."There are, Sāriputta, some ascetics and brahmins who are of such a view, of such a persuasion: ‘Purity comes through food.’ They say: ‘Let us subsist on jujubes.’ They eat jujubes, jujube flour, and drink jujube water—they partake of various kinds of jujube preparations. But, Sāriputta, I recall having eaten just a single jujube as food. You might think, Sāriputta: ‘Surely the jujube must have been large at that time.’ But, Sāriputta, you should not see it that way. The jujube was just the same size as it is now. From eating just that one jujube, Sāriputta, my body became extremely emaciated. My limbs became like the knotted joints of withered creepers or black creepers, so extreme was my lack of nourishment. My buttocks became like a camel’s hoof, so extreme was my lack of nourishment. My spine stood out like a string of beads, so extreme was my lack of nourishment. My ribs jutted out like the dilapidated rafters of an old shed, so extreme was my lack of nourishment. The pupils of my eyes sank deep into their sockets, appearing like the reflection of stars deep down in a deep well, so extreme was my lack of nourishment. The skin of my head shriveled like a bitter gourd cut raw and withered by wind and sun, so extreme was my lack of nourishment. When, Sāriputta, I tried to feel my belly, I would grasp my spine instead; when I tried to feel my spine, I would grasp my belly—so much had my belly and spine stuck together from lack of nourishment. When, Sāriputta, I tried to relieve myself or urinate, I would collapse face down right there from lack of nourishment. When, Sāriputta, I tried to ease my body by massaging my limbs with my hands, the rotten roots of my hair would fall out from my body from lack of nourishment."

159. ‘‘Santi kho pana, sāriputta, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘āhārena suddhī’ti. Te evamāhaṃsu – ‘muggehi yāpema…pe… tilehi yāpema…pe… taṇḍulehi yāpemā’ti. Te taṇḍulampi khādanti, taṇḍulacuṇṇampi khādanti, taṇḍulodakampi pivanti – anekavihitampi taṇḍulavikatiṃ paribhuñjanti. Abhijānāmi kho panāhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaṃyeva taṇḍulaṃ āhāraṃ āhāritā. Siyā kho pana te, sāriputta, evamassa – ‘mahā nūna tena samayena taṇḍulo ahosī’ti. Na kho panetaṃ, sāriputta, evaṃ daṭṭhabbaṃ. Tadāpi etaparamoyeva taṇḍulo ahosi, seyyathāpi etarahi. Tassa mayhaṃ, sāriputta, ekaṃyeva taṇḍulaṃ āhāraṃ āhārayato adhimattakasimānaṃ patto kāyo hoti. Seyyathāpi nāma āsītikapabbāni vā kāḷapabbāni vā, evamevassu me aṅgapaccaṅgāni bhavanti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma oṭṭhapadaṃ, evamevassu me ānisadaṃ hoti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma vaṭṭanāvaḷī, evamevassu me piṭṭhikaṇṭako unnatāvanato hoti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma jarasālāya gopānasiyo oluggaviluggā bhavanti, evamevassu me phāsuḷiyo oluggaviluggā bhavanti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma gambhīre udapāne udakatārakā gambhīragatā okkhāyikā dissanti, evamevassu me akkhikūpesu akkhitārakā gambhīragatā okkhāyikā dissanti tāyevappāhāratāya. Seyyathāpi nāma tittakālābu āmakacchinno vātātapena saṃphuṭito hoti sammilāto, evamevassu me sīsacchavi saṃphuṭitā hoti sammilātā tāyevappāhāratāya. So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, ‘udaracchaviṃ parimasissāmī’ti piṭṭhikaṇṭakaṃyeva pariggaṇhāmi, ‘piṭṭhikaṇṭakaṃ parimasissāmī’ti udaracchaviṃyeva pariggaṇhāmi. Yāvassu me, sāriputta, udaracchavi piṭṭhikaṇṭakaṃ allīnā hoti tāyevappāhāratāya. So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, ‘vaccaṃ vā muttaṃ vā karissāmī’ti tattheva avakujjo papatāmi tāyevappāhāratāya. So kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, tameva kāyaṃ assāsento pāṇinā gattāni anomajjāmi. Tassa mayhaṃ, sāriputta, pāṇinā gattāni anomajjato pūtimūlāni lomāni kāyasmā patanti tāyevappāhāratāya.

159."There are, Sāriputta, some ascetics and brahmins who are of such a view and declare: 'Purification comes through food.' They say: 'Let us live on mung beans... Let us live on sesame... Let us live on rice.' They eat rice, rice flour, and drink rice-water—they consume rice in various forms. I recall, Sāriputta, having taken just a single grain of rice as food. You might think, Sāriputta, 'Surely, the rice grains must have been large at that time.' But you should not see it that way. The rice grains were just the same size then as they are now. Due to eating just a single grain of rice, Sāriputta, my body reached an extreme state of emaciation. My limbs became like the knotted joints of withered creepers or black creepers, so extreme was my lack of food. My backside became like a camel’s hoof from so little food. My spine stood out like a string of beads, jutting out, one above the other, from such meager nourishment. My ribs jutted out like the dilapidated rafters of an old shed, so starved was my body. The pupils of my eyes sank deep into their sockets, appearing like the reflection of stars deep down in a well, due to such extreme lack of food. The skin of my head shriveled and withered like a bitter gourd cut raw and exposed to wind and sun. When I tried to touch the skin of my belly, Sāriputta, I would instead grasp my spine, and when I tried to touch my spine, I would grasp the skin of my belly—so tightly had my belly skin clung to my spine from such severe lack of food. If I tried to relieve myself, Sāriputta, I would collapse face-down right there from sheer weakness. To revive my body, Sāriputta, I would massage my limbs with my hands. But as I did so, the rotten roots of my hair would fall from my body due to such extreme lack of food."

‘‘Tāyapi kho ahaṃ, sāriputta, iriyāya tāya paṭipadāya tāya dukkarakārikāya nājjhagamaṃ uttariṃ manussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanavisesaṃ. Taṃ kissa hetu? Imissāyeva ariyāya paññāya anadhigamā, yāyaṃ ariyā paññā adhigatā ariyā niyyānikā, niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāya.

"Even by that mode of life, Sāriputta, by that practice, by that arduous striving, I did not attain any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. Why was that? Because I had not yet attained that noble wisdom which, when attained, is noble, liberating, and leads its practitioner to the complete destruction of suffering."

160. ‘‘Santi kho pana, sāriputta, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘saṃsārena suddhī’ti. Na kho pana so [na kho paneso (sī. syā.)], sāriputta, saṃsāro sulabharūpo yo mayā asaṃsaritapubbo iminā dīghena addhunā, aññatra suddhāvāsehi devehi. Suddhāvāse cāhaṃ, sāriputta, deve saṃsareyyaṃ, nayimaṃ lokaṃ punarāgaccheyyaṃ.

160."But, Sāriputta, there are some ascetics and brahmins who are exponents of such a doctrine and hold such a view: ‘Purity comes through transmigration.’ However, Sāriputta, that transmigration is not easily achievable which I have not already experienced in this long journey, except for the Pure Abode gods. And if I were to transmigrate among the Pure Abode gods, Sāriputta, I would not return to this world again."

‘‘Santi kho pana, sāriputta, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘upapattiyā suddhī’ti. Na kho pana sā, sāriputta, upapatti sulabharūpā yā mayā anupapannapubbā iminā dīghena addhunā, aññatra suddhāvāsehi devehi. Suddhāvāse cāhaṃ, sāriputta, deve upapajjeyyaṃ, nayimaṃ lokaṃ punarāgaccheyyaṃ.

Now, Sāriputta, there are some ascetics and brahmins who hold such a view and declare: ‘Purity comes through rebirth.’ But, Sāriputta, such a rebirth is not easily obtained, one which I have not previously experienced in this long journey, except among the Pure Abode devas. And if I were to be reborn among the Pure Abode devas, Sāriputta, I would not return to this world again.

‘‘Santi kho pana, sāriputta, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘āvāsena suddhī’ti. Na kho pana so, sāriputta, āvāso sulabharūpo yo mayā anāvuṭṭhapubbo [anāvutthapubbo (sī. pī.)] iminā dīghena addhunā, aññatra suddhāvāsehi devehi. Suddhāvāse cāhaṃ, sāriputta, deve āvaseyyaṃ, nayimaṃ lokaṃ punarāgaccheyyaṃ.

Now, Sāriputta, there are some ascetics and brahmins who hold such a view and declare: ‘Purity comes through dwelling.’ But, Sāriputta, such a dwelling is not easily obtained, one which I have not previously frequented in this long journey, except among the Pure Abode devas. And if I were to dwell among the Pure Abode devas, Sāriputta, I would not return to this world again.

‘‘Santi kho pana, sāriputta, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘yaññena suddhī’ti. Na kho pana so, sāriputta, yañño sulabharūpo yo mayā ayiṭṭhapubbo iminā dīghena addhunā, tañca kho raññā vā satā khattiyena muddhāvasittena brāhmaṇena vā mahāsālena.

Now, Sāriputta, there are some ascetics and brahmins who hold such a view and declare: ‘Purity comes through sacrifice.’ But, Sāriputta, such a sacrifice is not easily obtained, one which I have not previously performed in this long journey, and that by a king who is an anointed noble or by a wealthy brahmin.

‘‘Santi kho pana, sāriputta, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘aggiparicariyāya suddhī’ti. Na kho pana so, sāriputta, aggi sulabharūpo yo mayā apariciṇṇapubbo iminā dīghena addhunā, tañca kho raññā vā satā khattiyena muddhāvasittena brāhmaṇena vā mahāsālena.

Now, Sāriputta, there are some ascetics and brahmins who hold such a view and declare: ‘Purity comes through fire-worship.’ But, Sāriputta, such a fire is not easily obtained, one which I have not previously attended upon in this long journey, and that by a king who is an anointed noble or by a wealthy brahmin.

161. ‘‘Santi kho pana, sāriputta, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino – ‘yāvadevāyaṃ bhavaṃ puriso daharo hoti yuvā susukāḷakeso bhadrena yobbanena samannāgato paṭhamena vayasā tāvadeva paramena paññāveyyattiyena samannāgato hoti. Yato ca kho ayaṃ bhavaṃ puriso jiṇṇo hoti vuddho mahallako addhagato vayoanuppatto, āsītiko vā nāvutiko vā vassasatiko vā jātiyā, atha tamhā paññāveyyattiyā, parihāyatī’ti. Na kho panetaṃ, sāriputta, evaṃ daṭṭhabbaṃ. Ahaṃ kho pana, sāriputta, etarahi jiṇṇo vuddho mahallako addhagato vayoanuppatto, āsītiko me vayo vattati. Idha me assu, sāriputta, cattāro sāvakā vassasatāyukā vassasatajīvino, paramāya satiyā ca gatiyā ca dhitiyā ca samannāgatā paramena ca paññāveyyattiyena. Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, daḷhadhammā [daḷhadhammo (bahūsu) ṭīkā ca moggallānabyākaraṇaṃ ca oloketabbaṃ] dhanuggaho sikkhito katahattho katūpāsano lahukena asanena appakasireneva tiriyaṃ tālacchāyaṃ atipāteyya, evaṃ adhimattasatimanto evaṃ adhimattagatimanto evaṃ adhimattadhitimanto evaṃ paramena paññāveyyattiyena samannāgatā. Te maṃ catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ upādāyupādāya pañhaṃ puccheyyuṃ, puṭṭho puṭṭho cāhaṃ tesaṃ byākareyyaṃ, byākatañca me byākatato dhāreyyuṃ, na ca maṃ dutiyakaṃ uttari paṭipuccheyyuṃ. Aññatra asitapītakhāyitasāyitā aññatra uccārapassāvakammā, aññatra niddākilamathapaṭivinodanā apariyādinnāyevassa, sāriputta, tathāgatassa dhammadesanā, apariyādinnaṃyevassa tathāgatassa dhammapadabyañjanaṃ, apariyādinnaṃyevassa tathāgatassa pañhapaṭibhānaṃ. Atha me te cattāro sāvakā vassasatāyukā vassasatajīvino vassasatassa accayena kālaṃ kareyyuṃ. Mañcakena cepi maṃ, sāriputta, pariharissatha, nevatthi tathāgatassa paññāveyyattiyassa aññathattaṃ. Yaṃ kho taṃ [yaṃ kho panetaṃ (sī.)], sāriputta, sammā vadamāno vadeyya – ‘asammohadhammo satto loke uppanno bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussāna’nti, mameva taṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya ‘asammohadhammo satto loke uppanno bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussāna’’’nti.

161.Now, Sāriputta, there are some ascetics and brahmins who hold such a view and declare: ‘As long as this person is young, youthful, with jet-black hair, endowed with a fine youth, in the prime of life, so long is he endowed with supreme wisdom and discernment. But when this person is old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, having reached the final stage—eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old—then his wisdom and discernment decline.’ But, Sāriputta, this should not be seen thus. For I, Sāriputta, am now old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, having reached the final stage—my age is eighty. Suppose, Sāriputta, I had four disciples with a lifespan of a hundred years, living for a hundred years, endowed with supreme mindfulness, quickness, and retention, and with the highest wisdom and discernment. Just as, Sāriputta, a skilled archer, firm in aim, trained, practiced, and expert, could easily shoot a light arrow across the shadow of a palm tree with little effort, so too would they be endowed with exceedingly great mindfulness, exceedingly great quickness, exceedingly great retention, and with the highest wisdom and discernment. If they were to question me repeatedly about the four foundations of mindfulness, taking each in turn, and I were to answer each question, and they were to retain what I declared, they would not question me a second time. Apart from eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting, apart from eliminating excrement and urine, apart from dispelling sleep and fatigue, the Tathāgata’s teaching of the Dhamma would be inexhaustible, the phrases and syllables of the Tathāgata’s Dhamma would be inexhaustible, and the Tathāgata’s readiness in answering questions would be inexhaustible. And then, Sāriputta, those four disciples with a lifespan of a hundred years, living for a hundred years, would pass away at the end of a hundred years. Even if you were to carry me around on a cot, Sāriputta, there would be no change in the Tathāgata’s wisdom and discernment. If anyone, Sāriputta, were to rightly say: ‘A being whose nature is without delusion has arisen in the world for the welfare of many, for the happiness of many, out of compassion for the world, for the good, for the welfare, for the happiness of devas and humans,’ it is of me that they should rightly say this: ‘A being whose nature is without delusion has arisen in the world for the welfare of many, for the happiness of many, out of compassion for the world, for the good, for the welfare, for the happiness of devas and humans.’

162. Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā nāgasamālo bhagavato piṭṭhito ṭhito hoti bhagavantaṃ bījayamāno. Atha kho āyasmā nāgasamālo bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘acchariyaṃ, bhante, abbhutaṃ, bhante! Api hi me, bhante, imaṃ dhammapariyāyaṃ sutvā lomāni haṭṭhāni. Konāmo ayaṃ, bhante, dhammapariyāyo’’ti? ‘‘Tasmātiha tvaṃ, nāgasamāla, imaṃ dhammapariyāyaṃ lomahaṃsanapariyāyo tveva naṃ dhārehī’’ti.

162.Now at that time, the Venerable Nāgasamāla was standing behind the Blessed One, fanning him. Then the Venerable Nāgasamāla said to the Blessed One: “It is wonderful, venerable sir! It is amazing, venerable sir! Indeed, venerable sir, having heard this discourse on the Dhamma, my hairs stood on end. What is the name of this discourse on the Dhamma, venerable sir?” “Therefore, Nāgasamāla, you should remember this discourse on the Dhamma as ‘The Hair-raising Discourse.’”

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamano āyasmā nāgasamālo bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandīti.

This is what the Blessed One said. The Venerable Nāgasamāla was pleased and rejoiced at the Blessed One’s words.

Mahāsīhanādasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ dutiyaṃ.

The Great Lion’s Roar Sutta: The Second.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA27.6]]; [[EA31.8]]; [[EA46.4]]; [[EA50.6]]; [[SA612]]; [[SA684]]; [[SA686-687]]; [[SA701]] | M i 68 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.21]], [[EA46.4]], [[SA684]], [[SA701]], [[AN6.64]], [[SA686-687]], [[AN4.8]], [[EA27.6]], [[EA31.8]], [[MN36]], [[EA50.6]], [[SA612]], [[SN12.21-22]], [[SN52.15-24]], [[JA94]], [[DN8]], [[DN25]], [[MN45]], [[MN51]], [[MN60]], [[AN3.156-162]], [[AN4.198]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN12]]
> ◄  [[mn11-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn13-deepseek-pali]] ►
