---
sutta_code: "MN13"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahādukkhakkhandha Sutta "
  - "Mass of Suffering, Longer Discourse"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN13]]
> ◄  [[mn12-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn14-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 13. Mahādukkhakkhandhasuttaṃ

## 13. The Greater Discourse on the Aggregate of Suffering.

163. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisiṃsu. Atha kho tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ etadahosi – ‘‘atippago kho tāva sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya carituṃ, yaṃ nūna mayaṃ yena aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ ārāmo tenupasaṅkameyyāmā’’ti. Atha kho te bhikkhū yena aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ ārāmo tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā tehi aññatitthiyehi paribbājakehi saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu; sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinne kho te bhikkhū te aññatitthiyā paribbājakā etadavocuṃ – ‘‘samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo kāmānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapeti, mayampi kāmānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapema; samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo rūpānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapeti, mayampi rūpānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapema; samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo vedanānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapeti, mayampi vedanānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapema; idha no, āvuso, ko viseso, ko adhippayāso, kiṃ nānākaraṇaṃ samaṇassa vā gotamassa amhākaṃ vā – yadidaṃ dhammadesanāya vā dhammadesanaṃ, anusāsaniyā vā anusāsani’’nti? Atha kho te bhikkhū tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ bhāsitaṃ neva abhinandiṃsu, nappaṭikkosiṃsu; anabhinanditvā appaṭikkositvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamiṃsu – ‘‘bhagavato santike etassa bhāsitassa atthaṃ ājānissāmā’’ti.

163.Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park. Then, in the morning, a number of bhikkhus, having dressed and taken their bowls and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then it occurred to those bhikkhus: "It is still too early to walk for alms in Sāvatthī. Suppose we were to go to the monastery of the wanderers of other sects." Then those bhikkhus went to the monastery of the wanderers of other sects. Having arrived, they exchanged greetings with those wanderers of other sects. When they had exchanged courteous and amiable talk, they sat down to one side. As they were sitting to one side, those wanderers of other sects said to them: "Friends, the ascetic Gotama teaches the full knowledge of sensual pleasures; we too teach the full knowledge of sensual pleasures. The ascetic Gotama teaches the full knowledge of forms; we too teach the full knowledge of forms. The ascetic Gotama teaches the full knowledge of feelings; we too teach the full knowledge of feelings. Here, friends, what is the distinction, what is the advantage, what is the difference between the ascetic Gotama and us regarding the teaching of the Dhamma or the instruction?" Then those bhikkhus neither welcomed nor rejected the statement of those wanderers of other sects. Without welcoming or rejecting it, they got up from their seats and left, thinking: "We will learn the meaning of this statement in the presence of the Blessed One."

164. Atha kho te bhikkhū sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘idha mayaṃ, bhante, pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṃ piṇḍāya pāvisimha. Tesaṃ no, bhante, amhākaṃ etadahosi – ‘atippago kho tāva sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya carituṃ, yaṃ nūna mayaṃ yena aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ ārāmo tenupasaṅkameyyāmā’ti. Atha kho mayaṃ, bhante, yena aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ ārāmo tenupasaṅkamimha; upasaṅkamitvā tehi aññatitthiyehi paribbājakehi saddhiṃ sammodimha; sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdimha. Ekamantaṃ nisinne kho amhe, bhante, te aññatitthiyā paribbājakā etadavocuṃ – ‘samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo kāmānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapeti, mayampi kāmānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapema. Samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo rūpānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapeti, mayampi rūpānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapema. Samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo vedanānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapeti, mayampi vedanānaṃ pariññaṃ paññapema. Idha no, āvuso, ko viseso, ko adhippayāso, kiṃ nānākaraṇaṃ samaṇassa vā gotamassa amhākaṃ vā, yadidaṃ dhammadesanāya vā dhammadesanaṃ anusāsaniyā vā anusāsani’nti. Atha kho mayaṃ, bhante, tesaṃ aññatitthiyānaṃ paribbājakānaṃ bhāsitaṃ neva abhinandimha, nappaṭikkosimha; anabhinanditvā appaṭikkositvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamimha – ‘bhagavato santike etassa bhāsitassa atthaṃ ājānissāmā’’’ti.

164.Then those bhikkhus, having wandered for alms in Savatthi and returned from their almsround after the meal, approached the Blessed One. Having approached, they paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, those bhikkhus said to the Blessed One: "Here, Venerable Sir, in the morning, having dressed and taken our bowls and robes, we entered Savatthi for alms. It occurred to us, Venerable Sir: 'It is still too early to wander for alms in Savatthi. Why don’t we go to the park of the wanderers of other sects?' Then, Venerable Sir, we went to the park of the wanderers of other sects. Having approached, we exchanged greetings with those wanderers of other sects. When the courteous and amiable talk was concluded, we sat down to one side. While we were sitting there, Venerable Sir, those wanderers of other sects said to us: 'Friends, the ascetic Gotama teaches the full knowledge of sensual pleasures, and we too teach the full knowledge of sensual pleasures. The ascetic Gotama teaches the full knowledge of forms, and we too teach the full knowledge of forms. The ascetic Gotama teaches the full knowledge of feelings, and we too teach the full knowledge of feelings. So, friends, what is the distinction, what is the specific advantage, what is the difference between the ascetic Gotama and us, in regard to teaching the Dhamma or instructing?' Then, Venerable Sir, we neither approved nor rejected the statement of those wanderers of other sects. Without approving or rejecting, we rose from our seats and left, thinking: 'We shall learn the meaning of this statement in the presence of the Blessed One.'"

165. ‘‘Evaṃvādino, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evamassu vacanīyā – ‘ko panāvuso, kāmānaṃ assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇaṃ? Ko rūpānaṃ assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇaṃ? Ko vedanānaṃ assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇa’nti? Evaṃ puṭṭhā, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā na ceva sampāyissanti, uttariñca vighātaṃ āpajjissanti. Taṃ kissa hetu? Yathā taṃ, bhikkhave, avisayasmiṃ. Nāhaṃ taṃ, bhikkhave, passāmi sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake sassamaṇabrāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadevamanussāya yo imesaṃ pañhānaṃ veyyākaraṇena cittaṃ ārādheyya, aññatra tathāgatena vā tathāgatasāvakena vā, ito vā pana sutvā.

165."bhikkhus, when wanderers of other sects speak thus, they should be addressed as follows: ‘But friends, what is the gratification in sensual pleasures, what is the danger, and what is the escape? What is the gratification in forms, what is the danger, and what is the escape? What is the gratification in feelings, what is the danger, and what is the escape?’ Questioned thus, bhikkhus, those wanderers of other sects will be unable to satisfy, and moreover, will fall into frustration. For what reason? Because that is beyond their domain. bhikkhus, I do not see in this world with its devas, Maras, and Brahmas, in this generation with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, anyone who could satisfy the mind with an explanation of these questions, except for the Tathagata or a disciple of the Tathagata, or one who has heard it from them."

166. ‘‘Ko ca, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ assādo? Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. Katame pañca? Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā, sotaviññeyyā saddā…pe… ghānaviññeyyā gandhā … jivhāviññeyyā rasā… kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā – ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ – ayaṃ kāmānaṃ assādo.

166."And what, bhikkhus, is the allure of sensual pleasures? There are these five cords of sensual pleasure. What five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual desire, and arousing passion; sounds cognizable by the ear... odors cognizable by the nose... flavors cognizable by the tongue... tangibles cognizable by the body that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual desire, and arousing passion—these are the five cords of sensual pleasure. The happiness and joy, bhikkhus, that arise dependent on these five cords of sensual pleasure—this is the allure of sensual pleasures."

167. ‘‘Ko ca, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo? Idha, bhikkhave, kulaputto yena sippaṭṭhānena jīvikaṃ kappeti – yadi muddāya yadi gaṇanāya yadi saṅkhānena [saṅkhāya (ka.)] yadi kasiyā yadi vaṇijjāya yadi gorakkhena yadi issatthena yadi rājaporisena yadi sippaññatarena – sītassa purakkhato uṇhassa purakkhato ḍaṃsamakasavātātapasarīṃsapasamphassehi rissamāno [īrayamāno (ka.), samphassamāno (cūḷani. khaggavisāṇasutta 136)] khuppipāsāya mīyamāno; ayampi, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo sandiṭṭhiko, dukkhakkhandho kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu.

167."And what, bhikkhus, is the drawback of sensual pleasures? Here, bhikkhus, a clansman makes a living by some occupation—whether by accounting, calculation, reckoning, farming, trade, cattle-rearing, archery, royal service, or some other craft—enduring cold and heat, harassed by the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and creeping things, dying from hunger and thirst. This, bhikkhus, is a drawback of sensual pleasures, visible here and now, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures, rooted in sensual pleasures, based on sensual pleasures, simply due to sensual pleasures.

‘‘Tassa ce, bhikkhave, kulaputtassa evaṃ uṭṭhahato ghaṭato vāyamato te bhogā nābhinipphajjanti. So socati kilamati paridevati urattāḷiṃ kandati, sammohaṃ āpajjati – ‘moghaṃ vata me uṭṭhānaṃ, aphalo vata me vāyāmo’ti. Ayampi, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo sandiṭṭhiko dukkhakkhandho kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu.

"If, bhikkhus, when that clansman thus rises up, strives, and exerts himself, wealth does not accrue to him, he sorrows, grieves, laments, beats his breast, cries aloud, and falls into confusion, thinking: 'My rising up is in vain, my effort is fruitless!' This, too, bhikkhus, is a visible here-and-now drawback of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures, rooted in sensual pleasures, based on sensual pleasures, simply due to sensual pleasures.

‘‘Tassa ce, bhikkhave, kulaputtassa evaṃ uṭṭhahato ghaṭato vāyamato te bhogā abhinipphajjanti. So tesaṃ bhogānaṃ ārakkhādhikaraṇaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti – ‘kinti me bhoge neva rājāno hareyyuṃ, na corā hareyyuṃ, na aggi daheyya, na udakaṃ vaheyya [vāheyya (ka.)], na appiyā dāyādā hareyyu’nti. Tassa evaṃ ārakkhato gopayato te bhoge rājāno vā haranti, corā vā haranti, aggi vā dahati, udakaṃ vā vahati, appiyā vā dāyādā haranti. So socati kilamati paridevati urattāḷiṃ kandati, sammohaṃ āpajjati – ‘yampi me ahosi tampi no natthī’ti. Ayampi, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo sandiṭṭhiko, dukkhakkhandho kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu.

"If, bhikkhus, that clansman, while rising early, striving and exerting himself, acquires wealth, he experiences pain and distress in protecting it, thinking: 'How can kings not take my wealth, thieves not steal it, fire not burn it, water not carry it away, or unloved heirs not seize it?' And while he is guarding and protecting that wealth, kings take it, thieves steal it, fire burns it, water carries it away, or unloved heirs seize it. He sorrows, is miserable, laments, beats his breast, cries aloud, and falls into bewilderment, thinking: 'That which I had, I have no longer!' This, too, bhikkhus, is a visible drawback of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures, rooted in sensual pleasures, based on sensual pleasures, simply due to sensual pleasures.

168. ‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu rājānopi rājūhi vivadanti, khattiyāpi khattiyehi vivadanti, brāhmaṇāpi brāhmaṇehi vivadanti, gahapatīpi gahapatīhi vivadanti, mātāpi puttena vivadati, puttopi mātarā vivadati, pitāpi puttena vivadati, puttopi pitarā vivadati, bhātāpi bhātarā vivadati, bhātāpi bhaginiyā vivadati, bhaginīpi bhātarā vivadati, sahāyopi sahāyena vivadati. Te tattha kalahaviggahavivādāpannā aññamaññaṃ pāṇīhipi upakkamanti, leḍḍūhipi upakkamanti, daṇḍehipi upakkamanti, satthehipi upakkamanti. Te tattha maraṇampi nigacchanti, maraṇamattampi dukkhaṃ. Ayampi, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo sandiṭṭhiko, dukkhakkhandho kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu.

168."Furthermore, bhikkhus, caused by sensual pleasures, rooted in sensual pleasures, based on sensual pleasures, simply due to sensual pleasures, kings quarrel with kings, nobles with nobles, brahmins with brahmins, householders with householders; mother quarrels with son, son with mother; father quarrels with son, son with father; brother quarrels with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother; friend quarrels with friend. Engaging in these quarrels, conflicts, and disputes, they attack each other with their hands, with clods of dirt, with sticks, or with weapons. There they meet death, or suffering akin to death. This, too, bhikkhus, is the visible drawback of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures, rooted in sensual pleasures, based on sensual pleasures, simply due to sensual pleasures.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu asicammaṃ gahetvā, dhanukalāpaṃ sannayhitvā, ubhatobyūḷhaṃ saṅgāmaṃ pakkhandanti usūsupi khippamānesu, sattīsupi khippamānāsu, asīsupi vijjotalantesu. Te tattha usūhipi vijjhanti, sattiyāpi vijjhanti, asināpi sīsaṃ chindanti. Te tattha maraṇampi nigacchanti, maraṇamattampi dukkhaṃ. Ayampi, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo sandiṭṭhiko, dukkhakkhandho kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu.

Furthermore, bhikkhus, on account of sensual pleasures, due to sensual pleasures, because of sensual pleasures, for the sake of sensual pleasures, people take up sword and shield, buckle on bow and quiver, and plunge into battle arrayed on both sides. Arrows are shot, spears are hurled, swords flash. There they are pierced by arrows, pierced by spears, and their heads are cut off by swords. There they meet death or deadly suffering. This, bhikkhus, is the visible drawback of sensual pleasures—a mass of suffering on account of sensual pleasures, due to sensual pleasures, because of sensual pleasures, for the sake of sensual pleasures.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu asicammaṃ gahetvā, dhanukalāpaṃ sannayhitvā, addāvalepanā [aṭṭāvalepanā (syā. ka.)] upakāriyo pakkhandanti usūsupi khippamānesu, sattīsupi khippamānāsu, asīsupi vijjotalantesu. Te tattha usūhipi vijjhanti, sattiyāpi vijjhanti, chakaṇakāyapi [pakaṭṭhiyāpi (sī.)] osiñcanti, abhivaggenapi omaddanti, asināpi sīsaṃ chindanti. Te tattha maraṇampi nigacchanti, maraṇamattampi dukkhaṃ. Ayampi, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo sandiṭṭhiko, dukkhakkhandho kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu.

Furthermore, bhikkhus, on account of sensual pleasures, due to sensual pleasures, because of sensual pleasures, for the sake of sensual pleasures, people take up sword and shield, buckle on bow and quiver, and charge against walls plastered with wet mud. Arrows are shot, spears are hurled, swords flash. There they are pierced by arrows, pierced by spears, doused with rotten cow dung, crushed with a spiked battering ram, and their heads are cut off by swords. There they meet death or deadly suffering. This, bhikkhus, is the visible drawback of sensual pleasures—a mass of suffering on account of sensual pleasures, due to sensual pleasures, because of sensual pleasures, for the sake of sensual pleasures.

169. ‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu sandhimpi chindanti, nillopampi haranti, ekāgārikampi karonti, paripanthepi tiṭṭhanti, paradārampi gacchanti. Tamenaṃ rājāno gahetvā vividhā kammakāraṇā kārenti – kasāhipi tāḷenti, vettehipi tāḷenti, aḍḍhadaṇḍakehipi tāḷenti; hatthampi chindanti, pādampi chindanti, hatthapādampi chindanti, kaṇṇampi chindanti, nāsampi chindanti, kaṇṇanāsampi chindanti; bilaṅgathālikampi karonti, saṅkhamuṇḍikampi karonti, rāhumukhampi karonti, jotimālikampi karonti, hatthapajjotikampi karonti, erakavattikampi karonti, cīrakavāsikampi karonti, eṇeyyakampi karonti, baḷisamaṃsikampi karonti, kahāpaṇikampi karonti, khārāpatacchikampi karonti, palighaparivattikampi karonti, palālapīṭhakampi karonti, tattenapi telena osiñcanti, sunakhehipi khādāpenti, jīvantampi sūle uttāsenti, asināpi sīsaṃ chindanti. Te tattha maraṇampi nigacchanti, maraṇamattampi dukkhaṃ. Ayampi, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo sandiṭṭhiko, dukkhakkhandho kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu.

169.Furthermore, bhikkhus, on account of sensual pleasures, due to sensual pleasures, because of sensual pleasures, for the sake of sensual pleasures, people break into houses, plunder villages, commit mass abductions, engage in highway robbery, and commit adultery. Then kings, having seized them, subject them to various punishments—they have them flogged with whips, beaten with canes, struck with clubs; they cut off their hands, cut off their feet, cut off both hands and feet; they cut off their ears, cut off their noses, cut off both ears and noses; they subject them to 'the boiling gruel pot,' 'the conch-shell skull,' 'the Rāhu's mouth,' 'the garland of flames,' 'the burning lamp hands,' 'the grass-strip torture,' 'the bark-strip torture,' 'the antelope torture,' 'the flesh-hook torture,' 'the coin torture,' 'the lye-pickling torture,' 'the turning-bar torture,' 'the straw-mat torture'; they pour boiling oil over them, have them devoured by dogs, impale them alive on stakes, and behead them with swords. There they meet death or deadly suffering. This, bhikkhus, is the visible drawback of sensual pleasures—a mass of suffering on account of sensual pleasures, due to sensual pleasures, because of sensual pleasures, for the sake of sensual pleasures.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu kāyena duccaritaṃ caranti, vācāya duccaritaṃ caranti, manasā duccaritaṃ caranti. Te kāyena duccaritaṃ caritvā, vācāya duccaritaṃ caritvā, manasā duccaritaṃ caritvā, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjanti. Ayampi, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ ādīnavo samparāyiko, dukkhakkhandho kāmahetu kāmanidānaṃ kāmādhikaraṇaṃ kāmānameva hetu.

Furthermore, bhikkhus, on account of sensual pleasures, due to sensual pleasures, because of sensual pleasures, for the sake of sensual pleasures, people engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind. Having engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, at the breakup of the body, after death, they are reborn in a state of deprivation, a bad destination, the lower realms, even hell. This, bhikkhus, is the future drawback of sensual pleasures—a mass of suffering on account of sensual pleasures, due to sensual pleasures, because of sensual pleasures, for the sake of sensual pleasures.

170. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, kāmānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ? Yo kho, bhikkhave, kāmesu chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ – idaṃ kāmānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ.

170.And what, bhikkhus, is the escape from sensual pleasures? It is the subduing of desire and lust for sensual pleasures, the abandoning of desire and lust for sensual pleasures—this is the escape from sensual pleasures.

‘‘Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ kāmānaṃ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti te vata sāmaṃ vā kāme parijānissanti, paraṃ vā tathattāya samādapessanti yathā paṭipanno kāme parijānissatīti – netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ kāmānaṃ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti, te vata sāmaṃ vā kāme parijānissanti paraṃ vā tathattāya samādapessanti yathā paṭipanno kāme parijānissatīti – ṭhānametaṃ vijjati.

bhikkhus, any ascetics or brahmins who do not truly understand the gratification in sensual pleasures as gratification, the drawback as drawback, and the escape as escape, it is impossible that they could either fully understand sensual pleasures themselves, or encourage others to that understanding, so that those others might fully understand sensual pleasures. But bhikkhus, any ascetics or brahmins who truly understand the gratification in sensual pleasures as gratification, the drawback as drawback, and the escape as escape, it is possible that they could either fully understand sensual pleasures themselves, or encourage others to that understanding, so that those others might fully understand sensual pleasures.

171. ‘‘Ko ca, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ assādo? Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, khattiyakaññā vā brāhmaṇakaññā vā gahapatikaññā vā pannarasavassuddesikā vā soḷasavassuddesikā vā, nātidīghā nātirassā nātikisā nātithūlā nātikāḷī nāccodātā paramā sā, bhikkhave, tasmiṃ samaye subhā vaṇṇanibhāti? ‘Evaṃ, bhante’. Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, subhaṃ vaṇṇanibhaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ – ayaṃ rūpānaṃ assādo.

171.And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification of forms? Suppose, bhikkhus, there is a young woman of the noble caste, or the brahmin caste, or the householder caste, about fifteen or sixteen years old, neither too tall nor too short, neither too thin nor too stout, neither too dark nor too light—at that time, bhikkhus, isn't she at the height of her beauty and radiance? 'Yes, venerable sir.' The pleasure and joy that arise dependent on that beautiful appearance and radiance—this is the gratification of forms.

‘‘Ko ca, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ ādīnavo? Idha, bhikkhave, tameva bhaginiṃ passeyya aparena samayena āsītikaṃ vā nāvutikaṃ vā vassasatikaṃ vā jātiyā, jiṇṇaṃ gopānasivaṅkaṃ bhoggaṃ daṇḍaparāyanaṃ pavedhamānaṃ gacchantiṃ āturaṃ gatayobbanaṃ khaṇḍadantaṃ [khaṇḍadantiṃ (sī. pī.)] palitakesaṃ [palitakesiṃ], vilūnaṃ khalitasiraṃ valinaṃ tilakāhatagattaṃ [tilakāhatagattiṃ (bahūsu) aṭṭhakathā ṭīkā oloketabbā]. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, yā purimā subhā vaṇṇanibhā sā antarahitā, ādīnavo pātubhūtoti? ‘Evaṃ, bhante’. Ayampi, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ ādīnavo.

And what, bhikkhus, is the drawback of forms? Suppose, bhikkhus, one were to see that same sister at a later time, eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old, aged, bent like a roof rafter, broken-backed, leaning on a staff, trembling as she walks, afflicted by old age, her youth gone, broken-toothed, gray-haired, sparse-haired, bald-headed, wrinkled, her body covered with white and black spots. What do you think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and radiance vanished, and the drawback become evident? ‘Yes, venerable sir.’ This, too, is the drawback of forms.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tameva bhaginiṃ passeyya ābādhikaṃ dukkhitaṃ bāḷhagilānaṃ, sake muttakarīse palipannaṃ semānaṃ [seyyamānaṃ (ka.)], aññehi vuṭṭhāpiyamānaṃ, aññehi saṃvesiyamānaṃ. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, yā purimā subhā vaṇṇanibhā sā antarahitā, ādīnavo pātubhūtoti? ‘Evaṃ, bhante’. Ayampi, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ ādīnavo.

Furthermore, bhikkhus, suppose one were to see that same sister ailing, suffering, gravely ill, lying wallowing in her own urine and excrement, being lifted up by others, being laid down by others. What do you think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and radiance vanished, and the drawback become evident? ‘Yes, venerable sir.’ This, too, is the drawback of forms.

172. ‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tameva bhaginiṃ passeyya sarīraṃ sivathikāya chaḍḍitaṃ – ekāhamataṃ vā dvīhamataṃ vā tīhamataṃ vā, uddhumātakaṃ vinīlakaṃ vipubbakajātaṃ. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, yā purimā subhā vaṇṇanibhā sā antarahitā, ādīnavo pātubhūtoti? ‘Evaṃ, bhante’. Ayampi, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ ādīnavo.

172.Furthermore, bhikkhus, suppose one were to see that same sister’s body thrown aside in a charnel ground—one, two, or three days dead, bloated, bluish, and festering. What do you think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and radiance vanished, and the drawback become evident? ‘Yes, venerable sir.’ This, too, is the drawback of forms.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tameva bhaginiṃ passeyya sarīraṃ sivathikāya chaḍḍitaṃ – kākehi vā khajjamānaṃ, kulalehi vā khajjamānaṃ, gijjhehi vā khajjamānaṃ, kaṅkehi vā khajjamānaṃ, sunakhehi vā khajjamānaṃ, byagghehi vā khajjamānaṃ, dīpīhi vā khajjamānaṃ, siṅgālehi vā khajjamānaṃ, vividhehi vā pāṇakajātehi khajjamānaṃ. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, yā purimā subhā vaṇṇanibhā sā antarahitā, ādīnavo pātubhūtoti? ‘Evaṃ, bhante’. Ayampi, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ ādīnavo.

Furthermore, bhikkhus, suppose one were to see that same sister’s body thrown aside in a charnel ground—being devoured by crows, vultures, hawks, herons, dogs, tigers, leopards, jackals, or various kinds of creatures. What do you think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and radiance vanished, and the drawback become evident? ‘Yes, venerable sir.’ This, too, is the drawback of forms.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tameva bhaginiṃ passeyya sarīraṃ sivathikāya chaḍḍitaṃ – aṭṭhikasaṅkhalikaṃ samaṃsalohitaṃ nhārusambandhaṃ, aṭṭhikasaṅkhalikaṃ nimaṃsalohitamakkhitaṃ nhārusambandhaṃ, aṭṭhikasaṅkhalikaṃ apagatamaṃsalohitaṃ nhārusambandhaṃ, aṭṭhikāni apagatasambandhāni disāvidisāvikkhittāni – aññena hatthaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena pādaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena gopphakaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena jaṅghaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena ūruṭṭhikaṃ, aññena kaṭiṭṭhikaṃ, aññena phāsukaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena piṭṭhiṭṭhikaṃ, aññena khandhaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena gīvaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena hanukaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena dantaṭṭhikaṃ, aññena sīsakaṭāhaṃ. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, yā purimā subhā vaṇṇanibhā sā antarahitā, ādīnavo pātubhūtoti? ‘Evaṃ, bhante’. Ayampi, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ ādīnavo.

Furthermore, bhikkhus, suppose one were to see that same sister’s body thrown aside in a charnel ground—a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by tendons; a skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, held together by tendons; a skeleton free from flesh and blood, held together by tendons; bones scattered in all directions—here a hand bone, there a foot bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin bone, here a thigh bone, here a hip bone, here a rib bone, here a back bone, here a shoulder bone, here a neck bone, here a jaw bone, here a tooth bone, here a skull. What do you think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and radiance vanished, and the drawback become evident? ‘Yes, venerable sir.’ This, too, is the drawback of forms.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, tameva bhaginiṃ passeyya sarīraṃ sivathikāya chaḍḍitaṃ – aṭṭhikāni setāni saṅkhavaṇṇapaṭibhāgāni, aṭṭhikāni puñjakitāni terovassikāni, aṭṭhikāni pūtīni cuṇṇakajātāni. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, yā purimā subhā vaṇṇanibhā sā antarahitā, ādīnavo pātubhūtoti? ‘Evaṃ, bhante’. Ayampi, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ ādīnavo.

Furthermore, bhikkhus, suppose one were to see that same sister’s body thrown aside in a charnel ground—white bones, the color of conch shells; bones heaped up after more than a year; bones rotten and crumbled to dust. What do you think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and radiance vanished, and the drawback become evident? ‘Yes, venerable sir.’ This, too, is the drawback of forms.

‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, rūpānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ? Yo, bhikkhave, rūpesu chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṃ – idaṃ rūpānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ.

And what, bhikkhus, is the escape from forms? It is the subduing of desire and lust for forms, the abandoning of desire and lust for forms—this is the escape from forms.

‘‘Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ rūpānaṃ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti te vata sāmaṃ vā rūpe parijānissanti, paraṃ vā tathattāya samādapessanti yathā paṭipanno rūpe parijānissatīti – netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ rūpānaṃ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti te vata sāmaṃ vā rūpe parijānissanti paraṃ vā tathattāya samādapessanti yathā paṭipanno rūpe parijānissatīti – ṭhānametaṃ vijjati.

bhikkhus, any recluses or brahmins who do not truly understand, as they actually are, the gratification in forms as gratification, the danger in forms as danger, and the escape from forms as escape—it is impossible that they themselves will fully comprehend forms or will encourage others to that end, so that those who practice accordingly will fully comprehend forms. But, bhikkhus, any recluses or brahmins who do truly understand, as they actually are, the gratification in forms as gratification, the danger in forms as danger, and the escape from forms as escape—it is possible that they themselves will fully comprehend forms or will encourage others to that end, so that those who practice accordingly will fully comprehend forms.

173. ‘‘Ko ca, bhikkhave, vedanānaṃ assādo? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati, neva tasmiṃ samaye attabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti; abyābajjhaṃyeva tasmiṃ samaye vedanaṃ vedeti. Abyābajjhaparamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, vedanānaṃ assādaṃ vadāmi.

173.And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in feelings? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, enters and dwells in the first jhana, which is accompanied by thought and examination, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion. At the time, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, enters and dwells in the first jhana, he does not intend for his own affliction, nor for the affliction of others, nor for the affliction of both. At that time, he experiences a feeling that is unafflicted. I say, bhikkhus, that unafflictedness is the highest gratification in feelings.

‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati…pe… yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pītiyā ca virāgā, upekkhako ca viharati, sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedeti yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti – ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati…pe… yasmiṃ samaye, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati, neva tasmiṃ samaye attabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na parabyābādhāyapi ceteti, na ubhayabyābādhāyapi ceteti; abyābajjhaṃyeva tasmiṃ samaye vedanaṃ vedeti. Abyābajjhaparamāhaṃ, bhikkhave, vedanānaṃ assādaṃ vadāmi.

Furthermore, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhana, which has internal confidence and unification of mind, is without applied and sustained thought, and is filled with the rapture and happiness born of samādhi. At such a time, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu does not intend for his own affliction, nor for the affliction of others, nor for the affliction of both. At that time, he experiences a feeling that is unafflicted. I say, bhikkhus, that unafflictedness is the highest gratification in feelings. Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away of rapture, a bhikkhu dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending, experiencing happiness with the body. He enters and dwells in the third jhana, of which the noble ones declare: 'He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.' At such a time, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu does not intend for his own affliction, nor for the affliction of others, nor for the affliction of both. At that time, he experiences a feeling that is unafflicted. I say, bhikkhus, that unafflictedness is the highest gratification in feelings. Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhana, which is neither painful nor pleasant and includes the purity of mindfulness due to equanimity. At such a time, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu does not intend for his own affliction, nor for the affliction of others, nor for the affliction of both. At that time, he experiences a feeling that is unafflicted. I say, bhikkhus, that unafflictedness is the highest gratification in feelings.

174. ‘‘Ko ca, bhikkhave, vedanānaṃ ādīnavo? Yaṃ, bhikkhave, vedanā aniccā dukkhā vipariṇāmadhammā – ayaṃ vedanānaṃ ādīnavo.

174.And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in feelings? That feelings, bhikkhus, are impermanent, suffering, and subject to change—this is the danger in feelings.

‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, vedanānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ? Yo, bhikkhave, vedanāsu chandarāgavinayo, chandarāgappahānaṃ – idaṃ vedanānaṃ nissaraṇaṃ.

And what, bhikkhus, is the escape from feelings? It is the removal of desire and lust for feelings, the abandoning of desire and lust—this is the escape from feelings.

‘‘Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ vedanānaṃ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ nappajānanti, te vata sāmaṃ vā vedanaṃ parijānissanti, paraṃ vā tathattāya samādapessanti yathā paṭipanno vedanaṃ parijānissatīti – netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā evaṃ vedanānaṃ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṃ pajānanti te vata sāmaṃ vā vedanaṃ parijānissanti, paraṃ vā tathattāya samādapessanti yathā paṭipanno vedanaṃ parijānissatīti – ṭhānametaṃ vijjatī’’ti.

bhikkhus, any recluses or brahmins who do not truly understand, as they actually are, the gratification in feelings as gratification, the danger in feelings as danger, and the escape from feelings as escape—it is impossible that they themselves will fully comprehend feelings or will encourage others to that end, so that those who practice accordingly will fully comprehend feelings. But, bhikkhus, any recluses or brahmins who do truly understand, as they actually are, the gratification in feelings as gratification, the danger in feelings as danger, and the escape from feelings as escape—it is possible that they themselves will fully comprehend feelings or will encourage others to that end, so that those who practice accordingly will fully comprehend feelings.

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti.

This the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were pleased and rejoiced at the Blessed One's words.

Mahādukkhakkhandhasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ tatiyaṃ.

The Great Mass of Suffering Discourse, the third, is concluded.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn13-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA21.9]]; [[MA99]] | M i 83 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA21.9]], [[MA99]], [[AN2.1]], [[MN129]], [[AN6.63]], [[MN14]], [[MN139]], [[SN36.20]], [[SN36.19]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN14]], [[MN54]], [[SN35.63]], [[SN35.115]], [[SN35.189]], [[AN6.63]], [[AN9.34]], [[AN9.36]], [[THIG13]].1.


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN13]]
> ◄  [[mn12-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn14-deepseek-pali]] ►
