---
sutta_code: "MN138"
sutta_title:
  - "Uddesavibhaṅga Sutta "
  - "Analysis of a Recitation Passage"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN138]]
> ◄  [[mn137-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn139-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 138. Dhātuvibhaṅgasuttaṃ

## 138. The Discourse on the Analysis of Elements

342. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā magadhesu cārikaṃ caramāno yena rājagahaṃ tadavasari; yena bhaggavo kumbhakāro tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhaggavaṃ kumbhakāraṃ etadavoca – ‘‘sace te, bhaggava, agaru viharemu āvesane [viharāmāvesane (sī. pī.), viharāma nivesane (syā. kaṃ.), viharemu nivesane (ka.)] ekaratta’’nti. ‘‘Na kho me, bhante, garu. Atthi cettha pabbajito paṭhamaṃ vāsūpagato. Sace so anujānāti, viharatha [vihara (sī. pī.)], bhante, yathāsukha’’nti.

342.Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in Magadha when he arrived at Rājagaha. He went to the potter Bhaggava and said to him, "Bhaggava, if it is not troublesome to you, I would like to stay in your workshop for one night." "It is not troublesome for me, venerable sir. But there is a renunciate who has already come here for lodging. If he permits, venerable sir, stay as you wish."

Tena kho pana samayena pukkusāti nāma kulaputto bhagavantaṃ uddissa saddhāya agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito. So tasmiṃ kumbhakārāvesane [kumbhakāranivesane (syā. kaṃ. ka.)] paṭhamaṃ vāsūpagato hoti. Atha kho bhagavā yenāyasmā pukkusāti tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ pukkusātiṃ etadavoca – ‘‘sace te, bhikkhu, agaru viharemu āvesane ekaratta’’nti. ‘‘Urundaṃ, āvuso [ūrūndaṃ (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.), urūddhaṃ (ka.) dī. ni. 2 sakkapañhasuttaṭīkā oloketabbā], kumbhakārāvesanaṃ. Viharatāyasmā yathāsukha’’nti.

Now at that time a clansman named Pukkusāti, having faith in the Blessed One, had gone forth from the household life into homelessness. He was the first to take up residence in that potter’s workshop. Then the Blessed One approached Venerable Pukkusāti and said to him, "Monk, if it is no trouble to you, may we stay in this workshop for one night?" "The potter’s workshop is roomy, friend. Stay, venerable sir, as you please."

Atha kho bhagavā kumbhakārāvesanaṃ pavisitvā ekamantaṃ tiṇasanthārakaṃ [tiṇasantharikaṃ (sī.), tiṇasantharakaṃ (syā. kaṃ.)] paññāpetvā nisīdi pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. Atha kho bhagavā bahudeva rattiṃ nisajjāya vītināmesi. Āyasmāpi kho pukkusāti bahudeva rattiṃ nisajjāya vītināmesi.

Then the Blessed One entered the potter’s dwelling, had a spread of grass prepared for him in one corner, and sat down cross-legged, keeping his body erect and establishing mindfulness in front of him. The Blessed One spent much of the night in sitting. Venerable Pukkusāti also spent much of the night in sitting.

Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi – ‘‘pāsādikaṃ kho ayaṃ kulaputto iriyati. Yaṃnūnāhaṃ puccheyya’’nti. Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ pukkusātiṃ etadavoca – ‘‘kaṃsi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, uddissa pabbajito? Ko vā te satthā? Kassa vā tvaṃ dhammaṃ rocesī’’ti? ‘‘Atthāvuso, samaṇo gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito. Taṃ kho pana bhagavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato – ‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti. Tāhaṃ bhagavantaṃ uddissa pabbajito. So ca me bhagavā satthā. Tassa cāhaṃ bhagavato dhammaṃ rocemī’’ti. ‘‘Kahaṃ pana, bhikkhu, etarahi so bhagavā viharati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho’’ti. ‘‘Atthāvuso, uttaresu janapadesu sāvatthi nāma nagaraṃ. Tattha so bhagavā etarahi viharati arahaṃ sammāsambuddho’’ti. ‘‘Diṭṭhapubbo pana te, bhikkhu, so bhagavā; disvā ca pana jāneyyāsī’’ti? ‘‘Na kho me, āvuso, diṭṭhapubbo so bhagavā; disvā cāhaṃ na jāneyya’’nti.

Then it occurred to the Blessed One: "This clansman conducts himself in a pleasing manner. Suppose I were to question him." Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Pukkusāti thus: "Under whom, monk, have you gone forth? Who is your teacher? Whose Dhamma do you approve of?""Friend, there is the recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans, who went forth from the Sakyan clan. Concerning that Blessed Gotama, such a glorious report has spread: 'Indeed, that Blessed One is an Arahant, a Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.' I have gone forth under that Blessed One. He is my teacher. And I approve of that Blessed One’s Dhamma.""But where, monk, does that Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, now dwell?""Friend, in the northern regions there is a city called Sāvatthī. There that Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, now dwells.""But have you ever seen that Blessed One before? And would you recognize him if you saw him?""No, friend, I have never seen that Blessed One before; nor would I recognize him if I saw him."

Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi – ‘‘mamañca khvāyaṃ [maṃ tvāyaṃ (sī.), mamaṃ khvāyaṃ (syā. kaṃ.), maṃ khvāyaṃ (pī.)] kulaputto uddissa pabbajito. Yaṃnūnassāhaṃ dhammaṃ deseyya’’nti. Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ pukkusātiṃ āmantesi – ‘‘dhammaṃ te, bhikkhu, desessāmi. Taṃ suṇāhi, sādhukaṃ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī’’ti. ‘‘Evamāvuso’’ti kho āyasmā pukkusāti bhagavato paccassosi. Bhagavā etadavoca –

Then the Blessed One thought: "This clansman has gone forth having me in mind. Suppose I were to teach him the Dhamma." Then the Blessed One addressed Venerable Pukkusāti: "I will teach you the Dhamma, monk. Listen and pay close attention; I will speak." "Yes, friend," Venerable Pukkusāti replied to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said this:

343. ‘‘‘Chadhāturo [chaddhāturo (sī.)] ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso chaphassāyatano aṭṭhārasamanopavicāro caturādhiṭṭhāno; yattha ṭhitaṃ maññassavā nappavattanti, maññassave kho pana nappavattamāne muni santoti vuccati. Paññaṃ nappamajjeyya, saccamanurakkheyya, cāgamanubrūheyya, santimeva so sikkheyyā’ti – ayamuddeso dhātuvibhaṅgassa [chadhātuvibhaṅgassa (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)].

343."'This person, monk, is of six elements, six sense bases, eighteen mental preoccupations, and four foundations. Where the conceit 'I am' does not persist, when the conceit 'I am' does not persist, one is called a sage at peace. Do not neglect wisdom, protect the truth, cultivate relinquishment, and train only for peace'—this is the summary of the analysis of elements."

344. ‘‘‘Chadhāturo ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti – iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? (Chayimā, bhikkhu, dhātuyo) [( ) natthi sī. pī. potthakesu] – pathavīdhātu, āpodhātu, tejodhātu, vāyodhātu, ākāsadhātu, viññāṇadhātu. ‘Chadhāturo ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ.

344."‘This person, monk, is composed of six elements’—so it is said. But with reference to what is this said? (These are the six elements, monk:) the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air element, the space element, and the consciousness element. ‘This person, monk, is composed of six elements’—so it is said. This is said with reference to this."

345. ‘‘‘Chaphassāyatano ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti – iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? Cakkhusamphassāyatanaṃ, sotasamphassāyatanaṃ, ghānasamphassāyatanaṃ, jivhāsamphassāyatanaṃ, kāyasamphassāyatanaṃ, manosamphassāyatanaṃ. ‘Chaphassāyatano ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ.

345."‘This person, monk, has six sense bases’—so it is said. With reference to what is this said? The sense base for eye-contact, the sense base for ear-contact, the sense base for nose-contact, the sense base for tongue-contact, the sense base for body-contact, the sense base for mind-contact. ‘This person, monk, has six sense bases’—so it is said. This is with reference to that.

346. ‘‘‘Aṭṭhārasamanopavicāro ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti – iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? Cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā somanassaṭṭhānīyaṃ rūpaṃ upavicarati, domanassaṭṭhānīyaṃ rūpaṃ upavicarati, upekkhāṭṭhānīyaṃ rūpaṃ upavicarati; sotena saddaṃ sutvā…pe… ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā… jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā… kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā… manasā dhammaṃ viññāya somanassaṭṭhānīyaṃ dhammaṃ upavicarati, domanassaṭṭhānīyaṃ dhammaṃ upavicarati, upekkhāṭṭhānīyaṃ dhammaṃ upavicarati – iti cha somanassupavicārā, cha domanassupavicārā, cha upekkhupavicārā. ‘Aṭṭhārasamanopavicāro ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ.

346.“‘This person, bhikkhu, has eighteen mental preoccupations’—so it has been said. With reference to what was this said? Having seen a form with the eye, one is mentally preoccupied with a form that is a basis for joy, is mentally preoccupied with a form that is a basis for sorrow, is mentally preoccupied with a form that is a basis for equanimity. Having heard a sound with the ear... Having smelled an odor with the nose... Having tasted a flavor with the tongue... Having touched a tangible with the body... Having cognized a mental object with the mind, one is mentally preoccupied with a mental object that is a basis for joy, is mentally preoccupied with a mental object that is a basis for sorrow, and is mentally preoccupied with a mental object that is a basis for equanimity. Thus, there are six mental preoccupations with joy, six mental preoccupations with sorrow, and six mental preoccupations with equanimity. ‘This person, bhikkhu, has eighteen mental preoccupations’—so it has been said. This was said with reference to this.

347. ‘‘‘Caturādhiṭṭhāno ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti – iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? Paññādhiṭṭhāno, saccādhiṭṭhāno, cāgādhiṭṭhāno, upasamādhiṭṭhāno. ‘Caturādhiṭṭhāno ayaṃ, bhikkhu, puriso’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ.

347."‘This person, bhikkhu, has four foundations’—so it has been said. And with reference to what was this said? The foundation of wisdom, the foundation of truthfulness, the foundation of relinquishment, the foundation of tranquility. ‘This person, bhikkhu, has four foundations’—so it has been said. This was said with reference to this.

348. ‘‘‘Paññaṃ nappamajjeyya, saccamanurakkheyya, cāgamanubrūheyya, santimeva so sikkheyyā’ti – iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? Kathañca, bhikkhu, paññaṃ nappamajjati? Chayimā, bhikkhu, dhātuyo – pathavīdhātu, āpodhātu, tejodhātu, vāyodhātu, ākāsadhātu, viññāṇadhātu.

348."'One should not neglect wisdom, one should protect truth, one should cultivate relinquishment, and one should train oneself for peace'—so it has been said. With reference to what was this said? And how, bhikkhu, does one not neglect wisdom? Here, bhikkhu, there are these six elements: the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air element, the space element, the consciousness element.

349. ‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhu, pathavīdhātu? Pathavīdhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā pathavīdhātu? Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ kakkhaḷaṃ kharigataṃ upādinnaṃ [upādiṇṇaṃ (pī. ka.)], seyyathidaṃ – kesā lomā nakhā dantā taco maṃsaṃ nhāru aṭṭhi aṭṭhimiñjaṃ [aṭṭhimiñjā (sī. pī.)] vakkaṃ hadayaṃ yakanaṃ kilomakaṃ pihakaṃ papphāsaṃ antaṃ antaguṇaṃ udariyaṃ karīsaṃ, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ kakkhaḷaṃ kharigataṃ upādinnaṃ – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā pathavīdhātu. Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā pathavīdhātu yā ca bāhirā pathavīdhātu pathavīdhāturevesā. ‘Taṃ netaṃ mama nesohamasmi na meso attā’ti – evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā pathavīdhātuyā nibbindati, pathavīdhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti.

349."And what, bhikkhu, is the earth element? The earth element may be internal or external. And what, bhikkhu, is the internal earth element? Whatever internal, belonging to oneself, is hard, solid, and clung to—that is, head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, stomach contents, feces, or whatever else internal, belonging to oneself, is hard, solid, and clung to—this, bhikkhu, is called the internal earth element. Both the internal earth element and the external earth element are simply the earth element. ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self’—thus should it be seen with right wisdom as it really is. Having seen it thus with right wisdom as it really is, one becomes disenchanted with the earth element, and the mind becomes dispassionate toward the earth element."

350. ‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhu, āpodhātu? Āpodhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā āpodhātu? Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ āpo āpogataṃ upādinnaṃ seyyathidaṃ – pittaṃ semhaṃ pubbo lohitaṃ sedo medo assu vasā kheḷo siṅghāṇikā lasikā muttaṃ, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ āpo āpogataṃ upādinnaṃ – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā āpodhātu. Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā āpodhātu yā ca bāhirā āpodhātu āpodhāturevesā. ‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti – evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā āpodhātuyā nibbindati, āpodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti.

350."And what, monk, is the water element? The water element may be internal or external. And what, monk, is the internal water element? Whatever internal, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung to—that is to say: bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine, or whatever else internal, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung to—this is called, monk, the internal water element. Both the internal water element and the external water element are simply the water element. ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self’—thus it should be seen with right wisdom as it really is. Having seen it thus with right wisdom as it really is, one becomes disenchanted with the water element, and the mind becomes dispassionate toward the water element."

351. ‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhu, tejodhātu? Tejodhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā tejodhātu? Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ tejo tejogataṃ upādinnaṃ, seyyathidaṃ – yena ca santappati, yena ca jīrīyati, yena ca pariḍayhati, yena ca asitapītakhāyitasāyitaṃ sammā pariṇāmaṃ gacchati, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ tejo tejogataṃ upādinnaṃ – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā tejodhātu. Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā tejodhātu yā ca bāhirā tejodhātu tejodhāturevesā. ‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti – evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā tejodhātuyā nibbindati, tejodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti.

351.“And what, bhikkhu, is the fire element? The fire element may be internal or external. And what, bhikkhu, is the internal fire element? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung to, namely: that by which one is warmed, ages, and is consumed; and that by which what is eaten, drunk, chewed, and tasted is properly digested; or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung to—this is called, bhikkhu, the internal fire element. Both the internal fire element and the external fire element are simply the fire element. ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self’—thus should it be seen with right wisdom as it actually is. Having seen it thus with right wisdom as it actually is, one becomes disenchanted with the fire element, and the mind becomes dispassionate toward the fire element.”

352. ‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhu, vāyodhātu? Vāyodhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā vāyodhātu? Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ vāyo vāyogataṃ upādinnaṃ, seyyathidaṃ – uddhaṅgamā vātā adhogamā vātā kucchisayā vātā koṭṭhāsayā [koṭṭhasayā (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] vātā aṅgamaṅgānusārino vātā assāso passāso iti, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ vāyo vāyogataṃ upādinnaṃ – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā vāyodhātu. Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā vāyodhātu yā ca bāhirā vāyodhātu vāyodhāturevesā. ‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti – evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā vāyodhātuyā nibbindati, vāyodhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti.

352.“And what, bhikkhu, is the air element? The air element may be internal or external. What, bhikkhu, is the internal air element? Whatever internal, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung to; that is to say: up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in the belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the limbs, in-breath and out-breath; or whatever else internal, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung to—this is called, bhikkhu, the internal air element. Both the internal air element and the external air element are simply the air element. ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self’—thus should it be seen with right wisdom as it truly is. Having seen it thus with right wisdom as it truly is, one becomes disenchanted with the air element, and one’s mind becomes dispassionate toward the air element.”

353. ‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ākāsadhātu? Ākāsadhātu siyā ajjhattikā siyā bāhirā. Katamā ca, bhikkhu, ajjhattikā ākāsadhātu? Yaṃ ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ ākāsaṃ ākāsagataṃ upādinnaṃ, seyyathidaṃ – kaṇṇacchiddaṃ nāsacchiddaṃ mukhadvāraṃ yena ca asitapītakhāyitasāyitaṃ ajjhoharati, yattha ca asitapītakhāyitasāyitaṃ santiṭṭhati, yena ca asitapītakhāyitasāyitaṃ adhobhāgaṃ [adhobhāgā (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.) devadūtasuttena sameti] nikkhamati, yaṃ vā panaññampi kiñci ajjhattaṃ paccattaṃ ākāsaṃ ākāsagataṃ aghaṃ aghagataṃ vivaraṃ vivaragataṃ asamphuṭṭhaṃ maṃsalohitehi upādinnaṃ – ayaṃ vuccati bhikkhu ajjhattikā ākāsadhātu. Yā ceva kho pana ajjhattikā ākāsadhātu yā ca bāhirā ākāsadhātu ākāsadhāturevesā. ‘Taṃ netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti – evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya disvā ākāsadhātuyā nibbindati, ākāsadhātuyā cittaṃ virājeti.

353.“And what, bhikkhu, is the space element? The space element may be internal or external. And what, bhikkhu, is the internal space element? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is space, space-related, and clung to—such as the ear canal, the nostrils, the mouth opening, through which what is eaten, drunk, chewed, and savored is swallowed; where what is eaten, drunk, chewed, and savored remains; and through which what is eaten, drunk, chewed, and savored exits below; or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is space, space-related, a cavity, cavity-related, a hollow, hollow-related, not touched by flesh and blood, and clung to—this, bhikkhu, is called the internal space element. But both the internal space element and the external space element are simply the space element. ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self’—this should be seen as it really is with right wisdom. Seeing thus as it really is with right wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the space element, and one’s mind becomes dispassionate toward the space element.”

354. ‘‘Athāparaṃ viññāṇaṃyeva avasissati parisuddhaṃ pariyodātaṃ. Tena ca viññāṇena kiṃ [tena viññāṇena kiñca (sī.)] vijānāti? ‘Sukha’ntipi vijānāti, ‘dukkha’ntipi vijānāti, ‘adukkhamasukha’ntipi vijānāti. Sukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhā vedanā. So sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. ‘Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā sukhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

354.“Then only consciousness remains, perfectly pure and bright. And with that consciousness what does one cognize? One cognizes: ‘Pleasant,’ one cognizes: ‘Painful,’ one cognizes: ‘Neither-painful-nor-pleasant.’ When, bhikkhu, a pleasant-feeling-contact is the condition, a pleasant feeling arises. Experiencing a pleasant feeling, one understands: ‘I experience a pleasant feeling.’ One understands: ‘With the cessation of that very pleasant-feeling-contact, that pleasant feeling, which was felt and arose conditioned by pleasant-feeling-contact, ceases and subsides.’

355. ‘‘Dukkhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. So dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. ‘Tasseva dukkhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ dukkhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā dukkhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

355.“When, bhikkhu, a painful-feeling-contact is the condition, a painful feeling arises. Experiencing a painful feeling, one understands: ‘I experience a painful feeling.’ One understands: ‘With the cessation of that very painful-feeling-contact, that painful feeling, which was felt and arose conditioned by painful-feeling-contact, ceases and subsides.’

356. ‘‘Adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. So adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. ‘Tasseva adukkhamasukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā adukkhamasukhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

356.“When, bhikkhu, conditioned by a neither-painful-nor-pleasant-feeling-contact, a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling arises, one understands: ‘I experience a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.’ One understands: ‘With the cessation of that very neither-painful-nor-pleasant-feeling-contact, that neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, which was felt and arose conditioned by neither-painful-nor-pleasant-feeling-contact, ceases and subsides.’

357. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, dvinnaṃ kaṭṭhānaṃ saṅghaṭṭā [samphassa (sī. pī.), saṅghaṭā (syā. kaṃ.)] samodhānā usmā jāyati, tejo abhinibbattati, tesaṃyeva dvinnaṃ kaṭṭhānaṃ nānābhāvā vikkhepā yā tajjā usmā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammati; evameva kho, bhikkhu, sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati sukhā vedanā. So sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. ‘Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ sukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā sukhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

357.“Just as, bhikkhu, from the striking and combining of two pieces of wood, heat is generated and fire is produced, but with the separation and dispersal of those two pieces of wood, that heat ceases and subsides; so too, bhikkhu, conditioned by a pleasant-feeling-contact, a pleasant feeling arises. Feeling a pleasant feeling, one understands: ‘I am feeling a pleasant feeling.’ With the cessation of that very pleasant-feeling-contact, that pleasant feeling, which was felt and arose conditioned by pleasant-feeling-contact, ceases and subsides.”

358. ‘‘Dukkhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā vedanā. So dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. ‘Tasseva dukkhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ dukkhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā dukkhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

358.“When, bhikkhu, a painful-feeling-contact is the condition, a painful feeling arises. Experiencing that painful feeling, one understands: ‘I am experiencing a painful feeling.’ With the cessation of that very painful-feeling-contact, that painful feeling, which was felt and arose conditioned by painful-feeling-contact, ceases and subsides.”

359. ‘‘Adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ, bhikkhu, phassaṃ paṭicca uppajjati adukkhamasukhā vedanā. So adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti. ‘Tasseva adukkhamasukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā yaṃ tajjaṃ vedayitaṃ adukkhamasukhavedaniyaṃ phassaṃ paṭicca uppannā adukkhamasukhā vedanā sā nirujjhati, sā vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

359.“When, bhikkhu, conditioned by a neither-painful-nor-pleasant-feeling-contact, a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling arises, one understands: ‘I experience a feeling that is neither-painful-nor-pleasant.’ With the cessation of that very neither-painful-nor-pleasant-feeling-contact, that neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, which was felt and arose conditioned by neither-painful-nor-pleasant-feeling-contact, ceases and subsides.”

360. ‘‘Athāparaṃ upekkhāyeva avasissati parisuddhā pariyodātā mudu ca kammaññā ca pabhassarā ca. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, dakkho suvaṇṇakāro vā suvaṇṇakārantevāsī vā ukkaṃ bandheyya, ukkaṃ bandhitvā ukkāmukhaṃ ālimpeyya, ukkāmukhaṃ ālimpetvā saṇḍāsena jātarūpaṃ gahetvā ukkāmukhe pakkhipeyya, tamenaṃ kālena kālaṃ abhidhameyya, kālena kālaṃ udakena paripphoseyya, kālena kālaṃ ajjhupekkheyya, taṃ hoti jātarūpaṃ [jātarūpaṃ dhantaṃ (sī. pī.)] sudhantaṃ niddhantaṃ nīhaṭaṃ [nihataṃ (syā. kaṃ. ka.)] ninnītakasāvaṃ [nihatakasāvaṃ (ka.)] mudu ca kammaññañca pabhassarañca, yassā yassā ca piḷandhanavikatiyā ākaṅkhati – yadi paṭṭikāya [pavaṭṭikāya (sī. syā.)] yadi kuṇḍalāya yadi gīveyyakāya yadi suvaṇṇamālāya tañcassa atthaṃ anubhoti; evameva kho, bhikkhu, athāparaṃ upekkhāyeva avasissati parisuddhā pariyodātā mudu ca kammaññā ca pabhassarā ca.

360.“Then, only equanimity remains: perfectly pure, bright, pliable, workable, and radiant. Just as, bhikkhu, a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice would prepare a furnace, and having prepared the furnace mouth, would take gold with tongs and place it in the furnace mouth. From time to time, he would blow on it, from time to time sprinkle water on it, and from time to time just observe it. That gold becomes well-refined, thoroughly refined, free of impurities, rid of tarnish, pliable, workable, and radiant. Whatever kind of jewelry he wants to make from it—whether a belt, earring, necklace, or golden garland—it serves his purpose. In the same way, bhikkhu, only equanimity remains: perfectly pure, bright, pliable, workable, and radiant.”

361. ‘‘So evaṃ pajānāti – ‘imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ. Evaṃ me ayaṃ upekkhā taṃnissitā tadupādānā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya. Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ. Evaṃ me ayaṃ upekkhā taṃnissitā tadupādānā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya. Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ. Evaṃ me ayaṃ upekkhā taṃnissitā tadupādānā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyya. Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ. Evaṃ me ayaṃ upekkhā taṃnissitā tadupādānā ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭheyyā’’’ti.

361.“So he understands thus: ‘If I were to apply this equanimity—so purified, so bright—to the base of the infinity of space, and develop my mind in accordance with that, this equanimity of mine, dependent on that, sustained by that, would remain for a long time. If I were to apply this equanimity—so purified, so bright—to the base of the infinity of consciousness, and develop my mind in accordance with that, this equanimity of mine, dependent on that, sustained by that, would remain for a long time. If I were to apply this equanimity—so purified, so bright—to the base of nothingness, and develop my mind in accordance with that, this equanimity of mine, dependent on that, sustained by that, would remain for a long time. If I were to apply this equanimity—so purified, so bright—to the base of neither perception nor non-perception, and develop my mind in accordance with that, this equanimity of mine, dependent on that, sustained by that, would remain for a long time.’ ”

362. ‘‘So evaṃ pajānāti – ‘imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ; saṅkhatametaṃ. Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ; saṅkhatametaṃ. Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ; saṅkhatametaṃ. Imañce ahaṃ upekkhaṃ evaṃ parisuddhaṃ evaṃ pariyodātaṃ nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṃ upasaṃhareyyaṃ, tadanudhammañca cittaṃ bhāveyyaṃ; saṅkhatameta’’’nti.

362.He understands thus: ‘If I were to apply this equanimity, so purified and bright, to the base of the infinity of space, and develop my mind accordingly, that would be conditioned. If I were to apply this equanimity, so purified and bright, to the base of the infinity of consciousness, and develop my mind accordingly, that would be conditioned. If I were to apply this equanimity, so purified and bright, to the base of nothingness, and develop my mind accordingly, that would be conditioned. If I were to apply this equanimity, so purified and bright, to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, and develop my mind accordingly, that would be conditioned.’

‘‘So neva taṃ abhisaṅkharoti, na abhisañcetayati bhavāya vā vibhavāya vā. So anabhisaṅkharonto anabhisañcetayanto bhavāya vā vibhavāya vā na kiñci loke upādiyati, anupādiyaṃ na paritassati, aparitassaṃ paccattaṃyeva parinibbāyati. ‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti.

He neither constructs nor intends anything for existence or non-existence. Not constructing or intending for existence or non-existence, he does not cling to anything in the world. Not clinging, he is not agitated, and being unagitated, he personally attains Nibbāna. He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'

363. ‘‘So sukhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, ‘sā aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti. Dukkhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, ‘sā aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti. Adukkhamasukhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, ‘sā aniccā’ti pajānāti, ‘anajjhositā’ti pajānāti, ‘anabhinanditā’ti pajānāti.

363.When he feels a pleasant feeling, he understands, ‘It is impermanent.’ He understands, ‘It is not adhered to.’ He understands, ‘It is not delighted in.’ When he feels a painful feeling, he understands, ‘It is impermanent.’ He understands, ‘It is not adhered to.’ He understands, ‘It is not delighted in.’ When he feels a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands, ‘It is impermanent.’ He understands, ‘It is not adhered to.’ He understands, ‘It is not delighted in.’

364. ‘‘So sukhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, visaṃyutto naṃ vedeti; dukkhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, visaṃyutto naṃ vedeti; adukkhamasukhañce vedanaṃ vedeti, visaṃyutto naṃ vedeti. So kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, ‘kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānāti.

364.When he feels a pleasant feeling, he feels it detachedly. When he feels a painful feeling, he feels it detachedly. When he feels a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he feels it detachedly. Feeling a feeling limited to the body, he understands: 'I feel a feeling limited to the body.' Feeling a feeling limited to life, he understands: 'I feel a feeling limited to life.' He understands: 'On the dissolution of the body, with the cessation of life, all feelings, not being delighted in, will become cool right here.'

365. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhu, telañca paṭicca vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyati; tasseva telassa ca vaṭṭiyā ca pariyādānā aññassa ca anupahārā [anupāhārā (sī. pī.), anupādānā (ka.)] anāhāro nibbāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhu, kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘kāyapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayamāno ‘jīvitapariyantikaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, ‘kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā idheva sabbavedayitāni anabhinanditāni sītībhavissantī’ti pajānāti. Tasmā evaṃ samannāgato bhikkhu iminā paramena paññādhiṭṭhānena samannāgato hoti. Esā hi, bhikkhu, paramā ariyā paññā yadidaṃ – sabbadukkhakkhaye ñāṇaṃ.

365.Just as, bhikkhu, an oil lamp burns in dependence on oil and a wick; when the oil and wick are exhausted, and no more fuel is supplied, it is extinguished from lack of sustenance; so too, bhikkhu, feeling a feeling limited to the body, he understands: 'I feel a feeling limited to the body.' Feeling a feeling limited to life, he understands: 'I feel a feeling limited to life.' He understands: 'Upon the breakup of the body, after death, with the exhaustion of life, all feelings, not being delighted in, will become cool right here.' Therefore, a bhikkhu thus endowed is endowed with this supreme establishment of wisdom. For this, bhikkhu, is the supreme noble wisdom, namely, the knowledge of the destruction of all suffering.

366. ‘‘Tassa sā vimutti sacce ṭhitā akuppā hoti. Tañhi, bhikkhu, musā yaṃ mosadhammaṃ, taṃ saccaṃ yaṃ amosadhammaṃ nibbānaṃ. Tasmā evaṃ samannāgato bhikkhu iminā paramena saccādhiṭṭhānena samannāgato hoti. Etañhi, bhikkhu, paramaṃ ariyasaccaṃ yadidaṃ – amosadhammaṃ nibbānaṃ.

366.His liberation is established in truth and is unshakeable. For, bhikkhu, that which is false is of a deceiving nature, but the truth is Nibbāna, which is of a non-deceiving nature. Therefore, a bhikkhu endowed in this way is endowed with this supreme foundation of truth. For this, bhikkhu, is the supreme noble truth: Nibbāna, of a non-deceiving nature.

367. ‘‘Tasseva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno upadhī honti samattā samādinnā. Tyāssa pahīnā honti ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṃkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. Tasmā evaṃ samannāgato bhikkhu iminā paramena cāgādhiṭṭhānena samannāgato hoti. Eso hi, bhikkhu, paramo ariyo cāgo yadidaṃ – sabbūpadhipaṭinissaggo.

367.Previously, the undisciplined one had acquisitions, which were fully embraced and adhered to. These have been abandoned by him, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, so that they are no more subject to future arising. Therefore, a bhikkhu endowed in this way is endowed with this supreme determination of relinquishment. For this, bhikkhu, is the supreme noble relinquishment: the relinquishing of all acquisitions.

368. ‘‘Tasseva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno abhijjhā hoti chando sārāgo. Svāssa pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṃkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. Tasseva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno āghāto hoti byāpādo sampadoso. Svāssa pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṃkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. Tasseva kho pana pubbe aviddasuno avijjā hoti sammoho. Svāssa pahīno hoti ucchinnamūlo tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṃkato āyatiṃ anuppādadhammo. Tasmā evaṃ samannāgato bhikkhu iminā paramena upasamādhiṭṭhānena samannāgato hoti. Eso hi, bhikkhu, paramo ariyo upasamo yadidaṃ – rāgadosamohānaṃ upasamo. ‘Paññaṃ nappamajjeyya, saccamanurakkheyya, cāgamanubrūheyya, santimeva so sikkheyyā’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ.

368.Now, for that very person, previously untaught, there was covetousness, desire, and passion. But that is abandoned by him, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and subject to no further arising. Now, for that very person, previously untaught, there was aversion, ill will, and animosity. But that is abandoned by him, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and subject to no further arising. Now, for that very person, previously untaught, there was ignorance and delusion. But that is abandoned by him, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and subject to no further arising. Therefore, a bhikkhu possessed of these qualities is possessed of the supreme foundation of serenity. For this, bhikkhu, is the supreme noble serenity, that is, the serenity of lust, hate, and delusion. ‘One should not neglect wisdom; one should guard truth; one should increase generosity; one should train only for peace’—that is what was said, and it was with reference to this that it was said.

369. ‘‘‘Yattha ṭhitaṃ maññassavā nappavattanti, maññassave kho pana nappavattamāne muni santoti vuccatī’ti – iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ. Kiñcetaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ? ‘Asmī’ti, bhikkhu, maññitametaṃ, ‘ayamahamasmī’ti maññitametaṃ, ‘bhavissa’nti maññitametaṃ, ‘na bhavissa’nti maññitametaṃ, ‘rūpī bhavissa’nti maññitametaṃ, ‘arūpī bhavissa’nti maññitametaṃ, ‘saññī bhavissa’nti maññitametaṃ, ‘asaññī bhavissa’nti maññitametaṃ, ‘nevasaññīnāsaññī bhavissa’nti maññitametaṃ. Maññitaṃ, bhikkhu, rogo maññitaṃ gaṇḍo maññitaṃ sallaṃ. Sabbamaññitānaṃ tveva, bhikkhu, samatikkamā muni santoti vuccati. Muni kho pana, bhikkhu, santo na jāyati, na jīyati, na mīyati, na kuppati, na piheti. Tañhissa, bhikkhu, natthi yena jāyetha, ajāyamāno kiṃ jīyissati, ajīyamāno kiṃ mīyissati, amīyamāno kiṃ kuppissati, akuppamāno kissa [kiṃ (ka.)] pihessati? ‘Yattha ṭhitaṃ maññassavā nappavattanti, maññassave kho pana nappavattamāne muni santoti vuccatī’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. Imaṃ kho me tvaṃ, bhikkhu, saṃkhittena chadhātuvibhaṅgaṃ dhārehī’’ti.

369.‘Where thinking-processes do not occur, and when thinking-processes do not occur, the sage is called peaceful’—this was said. With reference to what was this said? ‘I am,’ bhikkhu, this is a thinking-process; ‘I am this’ is a thinking-process; ‘I shall be’ is a thinking-process; ‘I shall not be’ is a thinking-process; ‘I shall be with form’ is a thinking-process; ‘I shall be formless’ is a thinking-process; ‘I shall be percipient’ is a thinking-process; ‘I shall be non-percipient’ is a thinking-process; ‘I shall be neither percipient nor non-percipient’ is a thinking-process. Thinking-process, bhikkhu, is a disease; thinking-process is a boil; thinking-process is a dart. By overcoming all thinking-processes, bhikkhu, the sage is called peaceful. The peaceful sage, bhikkhu, is not born, does not age, does not die, is not shaken, and does not crave. For him, bhikkhu, there is nothing by which he might be born. Not being born, why would he age? Not aging, why would he die? Not dying, why would he be shaken? Not being shaken, why would he crave? ‘Where thinking-processes do not occur, and when thinking-processes do not occur, the sage is called peaceful’—this was said, and it was said with reference to this. You, bhikkhu, should remember from me this brief analysis of the six elements.

370. Atha kho āyasmā pukkusāti – ‘‘satthā kira me anuppatto, sugato kira me anuppatto sammāsambuddho kira me anuppatto’’ti uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ cīvaraṃ katvā bhagavato pādesu sirasā nipatitvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘accayo maṃ, bhante, accagamā yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yohaṃ bhagavantaṃ āvusovādena samudācaritabbaṃ amaññissaṃ. Tassa me, bhante, bhagavā accayaṃ accayato paṭiggaṇhātu āyatiṃ saṃvarāyā’’ti. ‘‘Taggha tvaṃ, bhikkhu, accayo accagamā yathābālaṃ yathāmūḷhaṃ yathāakusalaṃ, yaṃ maṃ tvaṃ āvusovādena samudācaritabbaṃ amaññittha. Yato ca kho tvaṃ, bhikkhu, accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikarosi, taṃ te mayaṃ paṭiggaṇhāma. Vuddhihesā, bhikkhu, ariyassa vinaye yo accayaṃ accayato disvā yathādhammaṃ paṭikaroti, āyatiṃ saṃvaraṃ āpajjatī’’ti. ‘‘Labheyyāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavato santike upasampada’’nti. ‘‘Paripuṇṇaṃ pana te, bhikkhu, pattacīvara’’nti? ‘‘Na kho me, bhante, paripuṇṇaṃ pattacīvara’’nti. ‘‘Na kho, bhikkhu, tathāgatā aparipuṇṇapattacīvaraṃ upasampādentī’’ti.

370.Then the Venerable Pukkusāti—thinking, “The Teacher has indeed come to me, the Fortunate One has indeed come to me, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One has indeed come to me”—rose from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, bowed his head at the Blessed One’s feet, and said to the Blessed One: “I have transgressed, venerable sir, in that I was foolish, deluded, and unskillful, imagining that I should address the Blessed One as ‘friend.’ May the Blessed One forgive me for this transgression, so that I may restrain myself in the future.”“Indeed, bhikkhu, you have transgressed in that you were foolish, deluded, and unskillful, imagining that you should address me as ‘friend.’ But since you see your transgression as a transgression and make amends for it as is proper, we forgive you. For it is growth, bhikkhu, in the discipline of the Noble One, when one sees a transgression as a transgression, makes amends for it as is proper, and undertakes restraint in the future.”“Venerable sir, may I receive the higher ordination in the Blessed One’s presence?”“But is your bowl and robe complete, bhikkhu?”“No, venerable sir, my bowl and robe are not complete.”“Bhikkhu, the Tathāgatas do not give the higher ordination to one whose bowl and robe are incomplete.”

Atha kho āyasmā pukkusāti bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pattacīvarapariyesanaṃ pakkāmi. Atha kho āyasmantaṃ pukkusātiṃ pattacīvarapariyesanaṃ carantaṃ vibbhantā gāvī [bhantagāvī (sī. pī.), gāvī (syā. kaṃ.)] jīvitā voropesi. Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘yo so, bhante, pukkusāti nāma kulaputto bhagavatā saṃkhittena ovādena ovadito so kālaṅkato. Tassa kā gati, ko abhisamparāyo’’ti? ‘‘Paṇḍito, bhikkhave, pukkusāti kulaputto paccapādi dhammassānudhammaṃ, na ca maṃ dhammādhikaraṇaṃ vihesesi [viheṭhesi (sī. syā. kaṃ.) viheseti (ka.)]. Pukkusāti, bhikkhave, kulaputto pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā’’ti.

Then Venerable Pukkusāti, having rejoiced and delighted in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him, and departed to seek a bowl and robes. Then, while Venerable Pukkusāti was searching for a bowl and robes, a stray cow took his life. Then several bhikkhus approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. Seated to one side, those bhikkhus said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, that clansman named Pukkusāti, who was given brief advice by the Blessed One, has passed away. What is his destiny? What is his future state?” “Wise, bhikkhus, was the clansman Pukkusāti. He practiced in accordance with the Dhamma and did not trouble me concerning the Dhamma. bhikkhus, the clansman Pukkusāti, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, has arisen spontaneously and will be utterly extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.”

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti.

The Blessed One said this. The bhikkhus, delighted, rejoiced at the Blessed One's words.

Dhātuvibhaṅgasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ dasamaṃ.

The Discourse on the Analysis of the Elements, the tenth, is completed.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn138-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA164]]; [[SA43]]; [[SA66]] | M iii 223 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA164]], [[SN22.7]], [[SA43]], [[SA66]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.192]], [[AN7.64]], [[AN8.54]], [[UD6.2]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN138]]
> ◄  [[mn137-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn139-deepseek-pali]] ►
