---
sutta_code: "MN21"
sutta_title:
  - "Kakacūpama Sutta "
  - "Simile of the Saw"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN21]]
> ◄  [[mn20-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn22-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 21. Kakacūpamasuttaṃ

## 21. The Simile of the Saw

222. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā moḷiyaphagguno bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ ativelaṃ saṃsaṭṭho viharati. Evaṃ saṃsaṭṭho āyasmā moḷiyaphagguno bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ viharati – sace koci bhikkhu āyasmato moḷiyaphaggunassa sammukhā tāsaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, tenāyasmā moḷiyaphagguno kupito anattamano adhikaraṇampi karoti. Sace pana koci bhikkhu tāsaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ sammukhā āyasmato moḷiyaphaggunassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, tena tā bhikkhuniyo kupitā anattamanā adhikaraṇampi karonti. Evaṃ saṃsaṭṭho āyasmā moḷiyaphagguno bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ viharati. Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘āyasmā, bhante, moḷiyaphagguno bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ ativelaṃ saṃsaṭṭho viharati. Evaṃ saṃsaṭṭho, bhante, āyasmā moḷiyaphagguno bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ viharati – sace koci bhikkhu āyasmato moḷiyaphaggunassa sammukhā tāsaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, tenāyasmā moḷiyaphagguno kupito anattamano adhikaraṇampi karoti. Sace pana koci bhikkhu tāsaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ sammukhā āyasmato moḷiyaphaggunassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, tena tā bhikkhuniyo kupitā anattamanā adhikaraṇampi karonti. Evaṃ saṃsaṭṭho, bhante, āyasmā moḷiyaphagguno bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ viharatī’’ti.

222.Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. Now at that time the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna was living in overly close association with the nuns. The Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna was living in such close association with the nuns that if any monk spoke disparagingly of those nuns in the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna’s presence, then the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna would become angry and displeased and would even make a quarrel. But if any monk spoke disparagingly of the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna in the presence of those nuns, then those nuns would become angry and displeased and would even make a quarrel. Thus the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna was living in overly close association with the nuns. Then a certain monk approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. Seated to one side, that monk said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna is living in overly close association with the nuns. He is living in such close association with the nuns that if any monk speaks disparagingly of those nuns in the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna’s presence, then the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna becomes angry and displeased and even makes a quarrel. But if any monk speaks disparagingly of the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna in the presence of those nuns, then those nuns become angry and displeased and even make a quarrel. Venerable sir, the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna is living in overly close association with the nuns in this way.”

223. Atha kho bhagavā aññataraṃ bhikkhuṃ āmantesi – ‘‘ehi tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mama vacanena moḷiyaphaggunaṃ bhikkhuṃ āmantehi – ‘satthā taṃ, āvuso phagguna, āmantetī’’’ti. ‘‘Evaṃ, bhante’’ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato paṭissutvā yenāyasmā moḷiyaphagguno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ moḷiyaphaggunaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘satthā taṃ, āvuso phagguna, āmantetī’’ti. ‘‘Evamāvuso’’ti kho āyasmā moḷiyaphagguno tassa bhikkhuno paṭissutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho āyasmantaṃ moḷiyaphaggunaṃ bhagavā etadavoca –

223.Then the Blessed One addressed a certain monk: “Come, monk, go in my name and summon the monk Moḷiyaphagguna, saying, ‘The Teacher calls you, friend Phagguna.’” “Yes, venerable sir,” that monk replied to the Blessed One. Then he approached the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna and said to him, “The Teacher calls you, friend Phagguna.” “Very well, friend,” the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna replied to that monk. Then he approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. The Blessed One said to the Venerable Moḷiyaphagguna as he was sitting to one side:

‘‘Saccaṃ kira tvaṃ, phagguna, bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ ativelaṃ saṃsaṭṭho viharasi? Evaṃ saṃsaṭṭho kira tvaṃ, phagguna, bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ viharasi – sace koci bhikkhu tuyhaṃ sammukhā tāsaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, tena tvaṃ kupito anattamano adhikaraṇampi karosi. Sace pana koci bhikkhu tāsaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ sammukhā tuyhaṃ avaṇṇaṃ bhāsati, tena tā bhikkhuniyo kupitā anattamanā adhikaraṇampi karonti. Evaṃ saṃsaṭṭho kira tvaṃ, phagguna, bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ viharasī’’ti? ‘‘Evaṃ, bhante’’ti. ‘‘Nanu tvaṃ, phagguna, kulaputto saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito’’ti? ‘‘Evaṃ, bhante’’ti.

“Is it true, Phagguna, that you are living in overly close association with the nuns? Is it true that you are living in such close association with the nuns that if any monk speaks disparagingly of those nuns in your presence, then you become angry and displeased and even make a quarrel? And if any monk speaks disparagingly of you in the presence of those nuns, then those nuns become angry and displeased and even make a quarrel. Is it true that you are living in such close association with the nuns?” “Yes, venerable sir.” “Phagguna, aren’t you a clansman who has gone forth out of faith from the household life to homelessness?” “Yes, venerable sir.”

224. ‘‘Na kho te etaṃ, phagguna, patirūpaṃ kulaputtassa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitassa, yaṃ tvaṃ bhikkhunīhi saddhiṃ ativelaṃ saṃsaṭṭho vihareyyāsi. Tasmātiha, phagguna, tava cepi koci sammukhā tāsaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ avaṇṇaṃ bhāseyya, tatrāpi tvaṃ, phagguna, ye gehasitā [gehassitā (?)] chandā ye gehasitā vitakkā te pajaheyyāsi. Tatrāpi te, phagguna, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ – ‘na ceva me cittaṃ vipariṇataṃ bhavissati, na ca pāpikaṃ vācaṃ nicchāressāmi, hitānukampī ca viharissāmi mettacitto, na dosantaro’ti. Evañhi te, phagguna, sikkhitabbaṃ.

224.“Phagguna, it is not suitable for a clansman who has gone forth in faith from the household life into homelessness to live associating too much with nuns. Therefore, Phagguna, even if someone should speak disparagingly of those nuns to your face, you should abandon any desires and thoughts connected with the household life. In that case, Phagguna, you should train yourself thus: ‘My mind will not be upset, I will not utter bad words, I will remain living with compassion and a mind of loving-kindness, without inner animosity.’ Thus, Phagguna, you should train yourself.

‘‘Tasmātiha, phagguna, tava cepi koci sammukhā tāsaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ pāṇinā pahāraṃ dadeyya, leḍḍunā pahāraṃ dadeyya, daṇḍena pahāraṃ dadeyya, satthena pahāraṃ dadeyya. Tatrāpi tvaṃ, phagguna, ye gehasitā chandā ye gehasitā vitakkā te pajaheyyāsi. Tatrāpi te, phagguna, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ ‘na ceva me cittaṃ vipariṇataṃ bhavissati, na ca pāpikaṃ vācaṃ nicchāressāmi, hitānukampī ca viharissāmi mettacitto, na dosantaro’ti. Evañhi te, phagguna, sikkhitabbaṃ.

“Therefore, Phagguna, even if someone strikes those nuns with a hand, a clod, a stick, or a knife right in front of you, you should abandon any household desires and thoughts. In that case, Phagguna, you should train yourself thus: ‘My mind will not be changed; I will not utter evil words; I will remain dwelling with compassion and kindness in my heart, without inner hate.’ This is how you should train yourself, Phagguna.”

‘‘Tasmātiha, phagguna, tava cepi koci sammukhā avaṇṇaṃ bhāseyya, tatrāpi tvaṃ, phagguna, ye gehasitā chandā ye gehasitā vitakkā te pajaheyyāsi. Tatrāpi te, phagguna, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ ‘na ceva me cittaṃ vipariṇataṃ bhavissati, na ca pāpikaṃ vācaṃ nicchāressāmi, hitānukampī ca viharissāmi mettacitto, na dosantaro’ti. Evañhi te, phagguna, sikkhitabbaṃ.

“Therefore, Phagguna, even if someone should speak disparagingly of you to your face, even then, Phagguna, you should abandon those desires and thoughts connected with the household life. Even then, Phagguna, you should train yourself thus: ‘My mind will not be affected by this, and I will utter no evil speech; I will remain full of compassion, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate.’ Thus, Phagguna, should you train yourself.

‘‘Tasmātiha, phagguna, tava cepi koci pāṇinā pahāraṃ dadeyya, leḍḍunā pahāraṃ dadeyya, daṇḍena pahāraṃ dadeyya, satthena pahāraṃ dadeyya, tatrāpi tvaṃ, phagguna, ye gehasitā chandā ye gehasitā vitakkā te pajaheyyāsi. Tatrāpi te, phagguna, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ ‘na ceva me cittaṃ vipariṇataṃ bhavissati, na ca pāpikaṃ vācaṃ nicchāressāmi, hitānukampī ca viharissāmi mettacitto, na dosantaro’ti. Evañhi te, phagguna, sikkhitabba’’nti.

“Therefore, Phagguna, even if someone should strike you with a hand, a clod, a stick, or a knife, you should abandon any domestic desires and thoughts there. In that case, Phagguna, you should train yourself thus: ‘My mind will not be changed, nor will I utter an evil speech, I will abide sympathetic, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate.’ Thus, Phagguna, you should train yourself.”

225. Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘ārādhayiṃsu vata me, bhikkhave, bhikkhū ekaṃ samayaṃ cittaṃ. Idhāhaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū āmantesiṃ – ahaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ekāsanabhojanaṃ bhuñjāmi. Ekāsanabhojanaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhikkhave, bhuñjamāno appābādhatañca sañjānāmi appātaṅkatañca lahuṭṭhānañca balañca phāsuvihārañca. Etha tumhepi, bhikkhave, ekāsanabhojanaṃ bhuñjatha. Ekāsanabhojanaṃ kho, bhikkhave, tumhepi bhuñjamānā appābādhatañca sañjānissatha appātaṅkatañca lahuṭṭhānañca balañca phāsuvihārañcāti. Na me, bhikkhave, tesu bhikkhūsu anusāsanī karaṇīyā ahosi; satuppādakaraṇīyameva me, bhikkhave, tesu bhikkhūsu ahosi.

225.Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: “Indeed, bhikkhus, the bhikkhus once satisfied me with their minds. Here, bhikkhus, I addressed the bhikkhus: ‘I, bhikkhus, eat a single meal. Eating a single meal, bhikkhus, I am aware of having little illness, little affliction, lightness, strength, and a comfortable abiding. Come, bhikkhus, you too eat a single meal. Eating a single meal, bhikkhus, you too will be aware of having little illness, little affliction, lightness, strength, and a comfortable abiding.’ There was no need for me to give instructions to those bhikkhus, bhikkhus; there was only a need for me to establish mindfulness in them.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, subhūmiyaṃ catumahāpathe ājaññaratho yutto assa ṭhito odhastapatodo. Tamenaṃ dakkho yoggācariyo assadammasārathi abhiruhitvā, vāmena hatthena rasmiyo gahetvā, dakkhiṇena hatthena patodaṃ gahetvā, yenicchakaṃ yadicchakaṃ sāreyyapi paccāsāreyyapi. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, na me tesu bhikkhūsu anusāsanī karaṇīyā ahosi, satuppādakaraṇīyameva me, bhikkhave, tesu bhikkhūsu ahosi. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, tumhepi akusalaṃ pajahatha, kusalesu dhammesu āyogaṃ karotha. Evañhi tumhepi imasmiṃ dhammavinaye vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjissatha.

“Just as, bhikkhus, on level ground at a four-way intersection, a thoroughbred chariot stands harnessed, with a goad set aside. Then a skilled trainer, a charioteer of horses, mounts it, takes the reins in his left hand, takes the goad in his right hand, and drives it forward and back as he wishes. In the same way, bhikkhus, there was no need for me to give those bhikkhus instructions; there was only a need for me to arouse mindfulness in them. Therefore, bhikkhus, you too should abandon the unwholesome and devote yourselves to wholesome qualities. For thus, bhikkhus, you too will attain growth, increase, and abundance in this Dhamma and Discipline.”

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gāmassa vā nigamassa vā avidūre mahantaṃ sālavanaṃ. Tañcassa eḷaṇḍehi sañchannaṃ. Tassa kocideva puriso uppajjeyya atthakāmo hitakāmo yogakkhemakāmo. So yā tā sālalaṭṭhiyo kuṭilā ojāpaharaṇiyo [ojaharaṇiyo (ka.)] tā chetvā [tacchetvā (sī. syā. pī.)] bahiddhā nīhareyya, antovanaṃ suvisodhitaṃ visodheyya. Yā pana tā sālalaṭṭhiyo ujukā sujātā tā sammā parihareyya. Evañhetaṃ, bhikkhave, sālavanaṃ aparena samayena vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjeyya. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, tumhepi akusalaṃ pajahatha, kusalesu dhammesu āyogaṃ karotha. Evañhi tumhepi imasmiṃ dhammavinaye vuddhiṃ virūḷhiṃ vepullaṃ āpajjissatha.

“Just as, bhikkhus, near a village or town, there is a large grove of sal trees, overgrown with castor-oil plants. Then a person might arise who desires its welfare, benefit, and security from bondage. He would cut down the crooked sal saplings that are detrimental to its vigor and remove them outside, thoroughly clearing the inner grove. But he would properly tend the straight and well-grown sal saplings. Thus, bhikkhus, that sal grove would in time attain growth, increase, and abundance. In the same way, bhikkhus, you too should abandon the unwholesome and devote yourselves to wholesome qualities. For thus, bhikkhus, you too will attain growth, increase, and abundance in this Dhamma and Discipline.”

226. ‘‘Bhūtapubbaṃ, bhikkhave, imissāyeva sāvatthiyā vedehikā nāma gahapatānī ahosi. Vedehikāya, bhikkhave, gahapatāniyā evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato – ‘soratā vedehikā gahapatānī, nivātā vedehikā gahapatānī, upasantā vedehikā gahapatānī’ti. Vedehikāya kho pana, bhikkhave, gahapatāniyā kāḷī nāma dāsī ahosi dakkhā analasā susaṃvihitakammantā.

226.“Once, bhikkhus, right here in Savatthi, there was a householder’s wife named Vedehikā. A good reputation had gone out about Vedehikā the householder’s wife: ‘Vedehikā the householder’s wife is amiable, Vedehikā the householder’s wife is humble, Vedehikā the householder’s wife is tranquil.’ Now, bhikkhus, Vedehikā the householder’s wife had a slave woman named Kāḷī, who was skilled, tireless, and well-organized in her work.”

‘‘Atha kho, bhikkhave, kāḷiyā dāsiyā etadahosi – ‘mayhaṃ kho ayyāya evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato – ‘‘soratā vedehikā gahapatānī, nivātā vedehikā gahapatānī, upasantā vedehikā gahapatānī’’ti. Kiṃ nu kho me ayyā santaṃyeva nu kho ajjhattaṃ kopaṃ na pātukaroti udāhu asantaṃ udāhu mayhamevete [mayhevete (sī. pī.)] kammantā susaṃvihitā yena me ayyā santaṃyeva ajjhattaṃ kopaṃ na pātukaroti, no asantaṃ? Yaṃnūnāhaṃ ayyaṃ vīmaṃseyya’nti. Atha kho, bhikkhave, kāḷī dāsī divā uṭṭhāsi. Atha kho, bhikkhave, vedehikā gahapatānī kāḷiṃ dāsiṃ etadavoca – ‘he je kāḷī’ti. ‘Kiṃ, ayye’ti? ‘Kiṃ, je, divā uṭṭhāsī’ti? ‘Na khvayye [na kho ayye (sī. pī.)], kiñcī’ti. ‘No vata re kiñci, pāpi dāsi [pāpadāsi (syā. ka.)], divā uṭṭhāsī’ti kupitā anattamanā bhākuṭiṃ [bhūkuṭiṃ (sī. pī.), bhakuṭīṃ (syā.)] akāsi. Atha kho, bhikkhave, kāḷiyā dāsiyā etadahosi – ‘santaṃyeva kho me ayyā ajjhattaṃ kopaṃ na pātukaroti, no asantaṃ; mayhamevete kammantā susaṃvihitā, yena me ayyā santaṃyeva ajjhattaṃ kopaṃ na pātukaroti, no asantaṃ. Yaṃnūnāhaṃ bhiyyosomattāya ayyaṃ vīmaṃseyya’’’nti.

“Then, bhikkhus, the slave girl Kāḷī thought: ‘My lady has such a fine reputation: “The householder’s wife Vedehikā is agreeable, the householder’s wife Vedehikā is humble, the householder’s wife Vedehikā is peaceful.” Does my lady truly not reveal inner anger when it is present, or is it absent? Or is it because my tasks are so well-arranged that my lady does not reveal inner anger even when it is present, and not because it is absent? Why don’t I test my lady?’ Then, bhikkhus, the slave girl Kāḷī got up late in the day. Then, bhikkhus, the householder’s wife Vedehikā said to the slave girl Kāḷī: ‘Hey, Kāḷī!’ ‘What is it, madam?’ ‘Why, girl, did you get up late in the day?’ ‘No reason, madam.’ ‘It’s not nothing, you wicked slave, that you got up late in the day!’ Angry and displeased, she frowned. Then, bhikkhus, the slave girl Kāḷī thought: ‘My lady does indeed reveal inner anger when it is present, not when it is absent. It is simply that my tasks are so well-arranged that my lady does not reveal inner anger even when it is present, and not because it is absent. Why don’t I test her even further?’

‘‘Atha kho, bhikkhave, kāḷī dāsī divātaraṃyeva uṭṭhāsi. Atha kho, bhikkhave, vedehikā gahapatānī kāḷiṃ dāsiṃ etadavoca – ‘he je, kāḷī’ti. ‘Kiṃ, ayye’ti? ‘Kiṃ, je, divātaraṃ uṭṭhāsī’ti? ‘Na khvayye, kiñcī’ti. ‘No vata re kiñci, pāpi dāsi, divātaraṃ uṭṭhāsī’ti kupitā anattamanā anattamanavācaṃ nicchāresi. Atha kho, bhikkhave, kāḷiyā dāsiyā etadahosi – ‘santaṃyeva kho me ayyā ajjhattaṃ kopaṃ na pātukaroti, no asantaṃ. Mayhamevete kammantā susaṃvihitā, yena me ayyā santaṃyeva ajjhattaṃ kopaṃ na pātukaroti, no asantaṃ. Yaṃnūnāhaṃ bhiyyosomattāya ayyaṃ vīmaṃseyya’nti.

“Then, bhikkhus, the slave girl Kāḷī got up even later in the day. Then, bhikkhus, the householder’s wife Vedehikā said to the slave girl Kāḷī: ‘Hey, Kāḷī!’ ‘What is it, madam?’ ‘Why, girl, did you get up even later in the day?’ ‘No reason, madam.’ ‘It’s not nothing, you wicked slave, that you got up even later in the day!’ Angry and displeased, she uttered displeasing words. Then, bhikkhus, the slave girl Kāḷī thought: ‘My lady does indeed reveal inner anger when it is present, not when it is absent. It is simply that my tasks are so well-arranged that my lady does not reveal inner anger even when it is present, and not because it is absent. Why don’t I test her even further?’

‘‘Atha kho, bhikkhave, kāḷī dāsī divātaraṃyeva uṭṭhāsi. Atha kho, bhikkhave, vedehikā gahapatānī kāḷiṃ dāsiṃ etadavoca – ‘he je, kāḷī’ti. ‘Kiṃ, ayye’ti? ‘Kiṃ, je, divā uṭṭhāsī’ti? ‘Na khvayye, kiñcī’ti. ‘No vata re kiñci, pāpi dāsi, divā uṭṭhāsī’ti kupitā anattamanā aggaḷasūciṃ gahetvā sīse pahāraṃ adāsi, sīsaṃ vobhindi [vi + ava + bhindi = vobhindi]. Atha kho, bhikkhave, kāḷī dāsī bhinnena sīsena lohitena galantena paṭivissakānaṃ ujjhāpesi – ‘passathayye, soratāya kammaṃ; passathayye, nivātāya kammaṃ, passathayye, upasantāya kammaṃ! Kathañhi nāma ekadāsikāya divā uṭṭhāsīti kupitā anattamanā aggaḷasūciṃ gahetvā sīse pahāraṃ dassati, sīsaṃ vobhindissatī’ti.

“Then, bhikkhus, the slave girl Kāḷī got up even later in the day. Then, bhikkhus, the householder’s wife Vedehikā said to the slave girl Kāḷī: ‘Hey, Kāḷī!’ ‘What is it, madam?’ ‘Why, girl, did you get up during the day?’ ‘No reason, madam.’ ‘It’s not nothing, you wicked slave, that you got up during the day!’ Angry and displeased, she took a latch-pin and struck her on the head, splitting it open. Then, bhikkhus, the slave girl Kāḷī, with her head split open and blood streaming down, complained to the neighbors: ‘See, madam, the deed of the agreeable one! See, madam, the deed of the humble one! See, madam, the deed of the peaceful one! How could she, angry and displeased at a single slave girl for getting up during the day, take a latch-pin and strike her on the head, splitting it open!’

‘‘Atha kho, bhikkhave, vedehikāya gahapatāniyā aparena samayena evaṃ pāpako kittisaddo abbhuggacchi – ‘caṇḍī vedehikā gahapatānī, anivātā vedehikā gahapatānī, anupasantā vedehikā gahapatānī’ti.

“Then, bhikkhus, after some time, this bad report about the householder’s wife Vedehikā arose: ‘The householder’s wife Vedehikā is fierce, the householder’s wife Vedehikā is not humble, the householder’s wife Vedehikā is not peaceful.’

‘‘Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco bhikkhu tāvadeva soratasorato hoti nivātanivāto hoti upasantūpasanto hoti yāva na amanāpā vacanapathā phusanti. Yato ca, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ amanāpā vacanapathā phusanti, atha bhikkhu ‘sorato’ti veditabbo, ‘nivāto’ti veditabbo, ‘upasanto’ti veditabbo. Nāhaṃ taṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṃ ‘suvaco’ti vadāmi yo cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārahetu suvaco hoti, sovacassataṃ āpajjati. Taṃ kissa hetu? Tañhi so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhāraṃ alabhamāno na suvaco hoti, na sovacassataṃ āpajjati. Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dhammaṃyeva sakkaronto, dhammaṃ garuṃ karonto, dhammaṃ mānento, dhammaṃ pūjento, dhammaṃ apacāyamāno [dhammaṃ yeva sakkaronto dhammaṃ garukaronto dhammaṃ apacāyamāno (sī. syā. pī.)] suvaco hoti, sovacassataṃ āpajjati, tamahaṃ ‘suvaco’ti vadāmi. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘dhammaṃyeva sakkarontā, dhammaṃ garuṃ karontā, dhammaṃ mānentā, dhammaṃ pūjentā, dhammaṃ apacāyamānā suvacā bhavissāma, sovacassataṃ āpajjissāmā’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ.

“Just so, bhikkhus, a certain monk is very agreeable, very humble, and very peaceful only as long as unpleasant words do not touch him. But when unpleasant words touch a monk, only then is he to be known as agreeable, humble, and peaceful. I do not call a monk ‘easy to admonish’ who is easy to admonish and submits to correction for the sake of robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicinal requisites. Why is that? Because if that monk does not get robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicinal requisites, he is not easy to admonish and does not submit to correction. But a monk who honors, respects, reveres, venerates, and esteems the Dhamma, being easy to admonish and submitting to correction, him I call ‘easy to admonish.’ Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will honor, respect, revere, venerate, and esteem the Dhamma, and be easy to admonish, submitting to correction.’ Thus should you train yourselves.

227. ‘‘Pañcime, bhikkhave, vacanapathā yehi vo pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ – kālena vā akālena vā; bhūtena vā abhūtena vā; saṇhena vā pharusena vā; atthasaṃhitena vā anatthasaṃhitena vā; mettacittā vā dosantarā vā. Kālena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ akālena vā; bhūtena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ abhūtena vā; saṇhena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ pharusena vā; atthasaṃhitena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ anatthasaṃhitena vā; mettacittā vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ dosantarā vā. Tatrāpi vo, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ – ‘na ceva no cittaṃ vipariṇataṃ bhavissati, na ca pāpikaṃ vācaṃ nicchāressāma, hitānukampī ca viharissāma mettacittā, na dosantarā. Tañca puggalaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā pharitvā viharissāma, tadārammaṇañca sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ mettāsahagatena cittena vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyābajjhena [abyāpajjhena (sī. syā. pī.), abyāpajjena (ka.) aṅguttaratikanipātaṭīkā oloketabbā] pharitvā viharissāmā’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ.

227.“bhikkhus, there are these five ways of speech by which others may address you: timely or untimely; true or untrue; gentle or harsh; beneficial or unbeneficial; with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hate. bhikkhus, others may address you in a timely or untimely way; with what is true or untrue; gently or harshly; with what is beneficial or unbeneficial; with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hate. In such cases, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘Our minds will remain unaffected, and we will utter no evil words. We will abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate. We will dwell pervading that person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, and beginning with them, we will dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness—abundant, expansive, immeasurable, without hostility, without ill will.’ Thus, bhikkhus, should you train yourselves.

228. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso āgaccheyya kudālapiṭakaṃ [kuddālapiṭakaṃ (sī. syā. pī.)] ādāya. So evaṃ vadeyya – ‘ahaṃ imaṃ mahāpathaviṃ apathaviṃ karissāmī’ti. So tatra tatra vikhaṇeyya [khaṇeyya (sī. syā. pī.)], tatra tatra vikireyya, tatra tatra oṭṭhubheyya, tatra tatra omutteyya – ‘apathavī bhavasi, apathavī bhavasī’ti. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, api nu so puriso imaṃ mahāpathaviṃ apathaviṃ kareyyā’’ti? ‘‘No hetaṃ, bhante’’. ‘‘Taṃ kissa hetu’’? ‘‘Ayañhi, bhante, mahāpathavī gambhīrā appameyyā. Sā na sukarā apathavī kātuṃ; yāvadeva ca pana so puriso kilamathassa vighātassa bhāgī assā’’ti. ‘‘Evameva kho, bhikkhave, pañcime vacanapathā yehi vo pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ – kālena vā akālena vā; bhūtena vā abhūtena vā; saṇhena vā pharusena vā; atthasaṃhitena vā anatthasaṃhitena vā; mettacittā vā dosantarā vā. Kālena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ akālena vā; bhūtena vā bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ abhūtena vā; saṇhena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ pharusena vā; atthasaṃhitena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ anatthasaṃhitena vā; mettacittā vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ dosantarā vā. Tatrāpi vo, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ – ‘na ceva no cittaṃ vipariṇataṃ bhavissati, na ca pāpikaṃ vācaṃ nicchāressāma, hitānukampī ca viharissāma mettacittā na dosantarā. Tañca puggalaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā pharitvā viharissāma, tadārammaṇañca sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ pathavisamena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyābajjhena pharitvā viharissāmā’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ.

228.“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were to come along carrying a hoe and a basket. He would say, ‘I will make this great earth be without earth!’ He would dig here and there, scatter soil here and there, spit here and there, urinate here and there, saying, ‘Be without earth! Be without earth!’ What do you think, bhikkhus, could that man make this great earth be without earth?’ ‘No, venerable sir.’ ‘Why is that?’ ‘Because, venerable sir, this great earth is deep and immeasurable. It is not easy to make it be without earth. That man would only partake of weariness and frustration.’ ‘Just so, bhikkhus, there are these five ways of speech by which others might address you—timely or untimely; true or untrue; gentle or harsh; beneficial or unbeneficial; with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hate. Others might address you, bhikkhus, in a timely or untimely way; with what is true or untrue; gently or harshly; with what is beneficial or unbeneficial; with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hate. In such cases, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘Our minds will remain unaffected, and we will utter no evil words. We will abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate. We will keep pervading that person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, and beginning with them, we will dwell pervading the entire world with a mind like the earth, abundant, exalted, measureless, without hostility and without ill will.’ Thus, bhikkhus, should you train yourselves.

229. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso āgaccheyya lākhaṃ vā haliddiṃ vā nīlaṃ vā mañjiṭṭhaṃ vā ādāya. So evaṃ vadeyya – ‘ahaṃ imasmiṃ ākāse rūpaṃ likhissāmi, rūpapātubhāvaṃ karissāmī’ti. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, api nu so puriso imasmiṃ ākāse rūpaṃ likheyya, rūpapātubhāvaṃ kareyyā’’ti? ‘‘No hetaṃ, bhante’’. ‘‘Taṃ kissa hetu’’? ‘‘Ayañhi, bhante, ākāso arūpī anidassano. Tattha na sukaraṃ rūpaṃ likhituṃ, rūpapātubhāvaṃ kātuṃ; yāvadeva ca pana so puriso kilamathassa vighātassa bhāgī assā’’ti. ‘‘Evameva kho, bhikkhave, pañcime vacanapathā yehi vo pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ kālena vā akālena vā …pe… ‘na ceva… tadārammaṇañca sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ ākāsasamena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyābajjhena pharitvā viharissāmā’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ.

229.“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were to come carrying lac, turmeric, blue dye, or madder. He would say, ‘I will draw a form in the sky and make it appear.’ What do you think, bhikkhus? Could that man draw a form in the sky and make it appear?’ ‘No, venerable sir.’ ‘Why is that?’ ‘Because, venerable sir, the sky is formless and invisible. It is not easy to draw a form there or make it appear; that man would only meet with fatigue and frustration.’ ‘Just so, bhikkhus, there are these five ways of speech by which others might address you—timely or untimely; true or untrue; gentle or harsh; beneficial or unbeneficial; with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hate. Others might address you, bhikkhus, in a timely or untimely way; with what is true or untrue; gently or harshly; with what is beneficial or unbeneficial; with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hate. In such cases, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘Our minds will remain unaffected, and we will utter no evil words. We will abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate. We will keep pervading that person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, and beginning with them, we will dwell pervading the entire world with a mind like space, abundant, exalted, measureless, without hostility and without ill will.’ Thus, bhikkhus, should you train yourselves.

230. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso āgaccheyya ādittaṃ tiṇukkaṃ ādāya. So evaṃ vadeyya – ‘ahaṃ imāya ādittāya tiṇukkāya gaṅgaṃ nadiṃ santāpessāmi saṃparitāpessāmī’ti. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, api nu so puriso ādittāya tiṇukkāya gaṅgaṃ nadiṃ santāpeyya saṃparitāpeyyā’’ti? ‘‘No hetaṃ, bhante’’. ‘‘Taṃ kissa hetu’’? ‘‘Gaṅgā hi, bhante, nadī gambhīrā appameyyā. Sā na sukarā ādittāya tiṇukkāya santāpetuṃ saṃparitāpetuṃ; yāvadeva ca pana so puriso kilamathassa vighātassa bhāgī assā’’ti. ‘‘Evameva kho, bhikkhave, pañcime vacanapathā yehi vo pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ kālena vā akālena vā…pe… ‘na ceva… tadārammaṇañca sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ gaṅgāsamena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyābajjhena pharitvā viharissāmā’’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ.

230.“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were to come carrying a blazing torch of grass. He might say: ‘With this blazing torch of grass, I will heat up and scorch the river Ganges.’ What do you think, bhikkhus? Would that man be able to heat up and scorch the river Ganges with that blazing torch of grass?” “No, Bhante.” “For what reason?” “Because, Bhante, the river Ganges is deep and immeasurable. It is not easy to heat and scorch it with a blazing torch of grass. That man would only reap weariness and vexation.” “Just so, bhikkhus, are these five ways of speaking by which others may address you, whether timely or untimely… (as before)… ‘and we will dwell pervading the entire world with a mind like the Ganges, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, and without ill will.’ Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”

231. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, biḷārabhastā madditā sumadditā suparimadditā, mudukā tūlinī chinnasassarā chinnabhabbharā. Atha puriso āgaccheyya kaṭṭhaṃ vā kathalaṃ [kaṭhalaṃ (sī. syā. pī.)] vā ādāya. So evaṃ vadeyya – ‘ahaṃ imaṃ biḷārabhastaṃ madditaṃ sumadditaṃ suparimadditaṃ, mudukaṃ tūliniṃ, chinnasassaraṃ chinnabhabbharaṃ kaṭṭhena vā kathalena vā sarasaraṃ karissāmi bharabharaṃ karissāmī’ti. Taṃ kiṃ maññatha, bhikkhave, api nu so puriso amuṃ biḷārabhastaṃ madditaṃ sumadditaṃ suparimadditaṃ, mudukaṃ tūliniṃ, chinnasassaraṃ chinnabhabbharaṃ kaṭṭhena vā kathalena vā sarasaraṃ kareyya, bharabharaṃ kareyyā’’ti? ‘‘No hetaṃ, bhante’’. ‘‘Taṃ kissa hetu’’? ‘‘Amu hi, bhante, biḷārabhastā madditā sumadditā suparimadditā, mudukā tūlinī, chinnasassarā chinnabhabbharā. Sā na sukarā kaṭṭhena vā kathalena vā sarasaraṃ kātuṃ bharabharaṃ kātuṃ; yāvadeva ca pana so puriso kilamathassa vighātassa bhāgī assā’’ti. ‘‘Evameva kho, bhikkhave, pañcime vacanapathā yehi vo pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ kālena vā akālena vā; bhūtena vā abhūtena vā; saṇhena vā pharusena vā; atthasaṃhitena vā anatthasaṃhitena vā; mettacittā vā dosantarā vā. Kālena vā bhikkhave pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ akālena vā; bhūtena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ abhūtena vā; saṇhena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ pharusena vā; atthasaṃhitena vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ anatthasaṃhitena vā; mettacittā vā, bhikkhave, pare vadamānā vadeyyuṃ dosantarā vā. Tatrāpi vo, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ – ‘na ceva no cittaṃ vipariṇataṃ bhavissati, na ca pāpikaṃ vācaṃ nicchāressāma hitānukampī ca viharissāma mettacittā na dosantarā. Tañca puggalaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā pharitvā viharissāma, tadārammaṇañca sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ biḷārabhastāsamena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyābajjhena pharitvā viharissāmā’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ.

231.“Suppose, bhikkhus, there were a cat-skin bag that had been kneaded, thoroughly kneaded, completely kneaded—soft, like cotton-wool, with its rustling and rattling sounds cut off. Then a man were to come carrying a stick or a potsherd. He might say: ‘With this stick or potsherd, I will make this cat-skin bag—kneaded, thoroughly kneaded, completely kneaded, soft, like cotton-wool, with its rustling and rattling sounds cut off—rustle and rattle.’ What do you think, bhikkhus? Would that man be able to make that cat-skin bag—kneaded, thoroughly kneaded, completely kneaded, soft, like cotton-wool, with its rustling and rattling sounds cut off—rustle and rattle with a stick or a potsherd?” “No, Bhante.” “For what reason?” “Because, Bhante, that cat-skin bag has been kneaded, thoroughly kneaded, completely kneaded—soft, like cotton-wool, with its rustling and rattling sounds cut off. It is not easy to make it rustle or rattle with a stick or a potsherd. That man would only reap weariness and vexation.” “Just so, bhikkhus, are these five ways of speaking by which others may address you—whether timely or untimely; with what is true or untrue; gently or harshly; connected with benefit or not connected with benefit; with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hatred. Whether timely or untimely, bhikkhus, others may address you; whether with what is true or untrue, bhikkhus, others may address you; whether gently or harshly, bhikkhus, others may address you; whether connected with benefit or not connected with benefit, bhikkhus, others may address you; whether with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hatred, bhikkhus, others may address you. In such a case, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘Our minds will remain unaffected; we will utter no evil words; we will abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hatred. We will dwell pervading that person with a mind accompanied by loving-kindness, and beginning with that person, we will dwell pervading the entire world with a mind like a cat-skin bag—vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, and without ill will.’ Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”

232. ‘‘Ubhatodaṇḍakena cepi, bhikkhave, kakacena corā ocarakā aṅgamaṅgāni okanteyyuṃ, tatrāpi yo mano padūseyya, na me so tena sāsanakaro. Tatrāpi vo, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ – ‘na ceva no cittaṃ vipariṇataṃ bhavissati, na ca pāpikaṃ vācaṃ nicchāressāma, hitānukampī ca viharissāma mettacittā na dosantarā. Tañca puggalaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā pharitvā viharissāma tadārammaṇañca sabbāvantaṃ lokaṃ mettāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyābajjhena pharitvā viharissāmā’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ.

232.“Even if, bhikkhus, bandits, low-down fellows, were to sever your limbs one by one with a two-handled saw, if one were to defile one’s mind, he would not be one who carries out my teaching thereby. In such a case, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘Our minds will remain unaffected; we will utter no evil words; we will abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hatred. We will dwell pervading that person with a mind accompanied by loving-kindness, and beginning with that person, we will dwell pervading the entire world with a mind accompanied by loving-kindness—vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, and without ill will.’ Thus, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves.”

233. ‘‘Imañca [imañce (?)] tumhe, bhikkhave, kakacūpamaṃ ovādaṃ abhikkhaṇaṃ manasi kareyyātha. Passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, taṃ vacanapathaṃ, aṇuṃ vā thūlaṃ vā, yaṃ tumhe nādhivāseyyāthā’’ti? ‘‘No hetaṃ, bhante’’. ‘‘Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, imaṃ kakacūpamaṃ ovādaṃ abhikkhaṇaṃ manasikarotha. Taṃ vo bhavissati dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā’’ti.

233.“And, bhikkhus, you should frequently keep in mind this instruction on the simile of the saw. Do you see, bhikkhus, any such way of speaking, subtle or gross, that you would not tolerate?” “No, Bhante.” “Therefore, bhikkhus, keep in mind this instruction on the simile of the saw. That will be for your long-term welfare and happiness.”

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti.

This is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were pleased and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

Kakacūpamasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ paṭhamaṃ.

The Discourse on the Simile of the Saw is finished.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn21-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA50.8]]; [[MA193]]; [[MA200]] | M i 122 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA50.8]], [[MA193]], [[MN22]], [[MA200]], [[MN28]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN8.63]], [[MN40]], [[MN21]], [[MA30]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN21]]
> ◄  [[mn20-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn22-deepseek-pali]] ►
