---
sutta_code: "MN3"
sutta_title:
  - "Dhammadāyāda Sutta "
  - "Heirs in the Teaching"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN3]]
> ◄  [[mn2-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn4-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 3. Dhammadāyādasuttaṃ

## 3. Dhammadāyāda Sutta

29. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘bhikkhavo’’ti. ‘‘Bhadante’’ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. Bhagavā etadavoca –

29.Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi in Jeta Grove, Anathapindika’s Park. There the Blessed One addressed the monks: “Monks!” “Venerable sir,” those monks replied. The Blessed One said this:

‘‘Dhammadāyādā me, bhikkhave, bhavatha, mā āmisadāyādā. Atthi me tumhesu anukampā – ‘kinti me sāvakā dhammadāyādā bhaveyyuṃ, no āmisadāyādā’ti. Tumhe ca me, bhikkhave, āmisadāyādā bhaveyyātha no dhammadāyādā, tumhepi tena ādiyā [ādissā (sī. syā. pī.)] bhaveyyātha – ‘āmisadāyādā satthusāvakā viharanti, no dhammadāyādā’ti; ahampi tena ādiyo bhaveyyaṃ – ‘āmisadāyādā satthusāvakā viharanti, no dhammadāyādā’ti. Tumhe ca me, bhikkhave, dhammadāyādā bhaveyyātha, no āmisadāyādā, tumhepi tena na ādiyā bhaveyyātha – ‘dhammadāyādā satthusāvakā viharanti, no āmisadāyādā’ti; ahampi tena na ādiyo bhaveyyaṃ – ‘dhammadāyādā satthusāvakā viharanti, no āmisadāyādā’ti. Tasmātiha me, bhikkhave, dhammadāyādā bhavatha, mā āmisadāyādā. Atthi me tumhesu anukampā – ‘kinti me sāvakā dhammadāyādā bhaveyyuṃ, no āmisadāyādā’ti.

“Be my heirs in the Dhamma, bhikkhus, not heirs in provisions. I have compassion for you, thinking, ‘How can my disciples become heirs in the Dhamma, not heirs in provisions?’ If you, bhikkhus, were to be my heirs in provisions and not heirs in the Dhamma, you would be censured on that account, thinking: ‘The Teacher’s disciples live as heirs in provisions, not heirs in the Dhamma.’ And I too would be censured on that account, thinking: ‘The Teacher’s disciples live as heirs in provisions, not heirs in the Dhamma.’ But if you, bhikkhus, are my heirs in the Dhamma and not heirs in provisions, you would not be censured on that account, thinking: ‘The Teacher’s disciples live as heirs in the Dhamma, not heirs in provisions.’ And I too would not be censured on that account, thinking: ‘The Teacher’s disciples live as heirs in the Dhamma, not heirs in provisions.’ Therefore, bhikkhus, be my heirs in the Dhamma, not heirs in provisions. I have compassion for you, thinking, ‘How can my disciples become heirs in the Dhamma, not heirs in provisions?’”

30. ‘‘Idhāhaṃ, bhikkhave, bhuttāvī assaṃ pavārito paripuṇṇo pariyosito suhito yāvadattho; siyā ca me piṇḍapāto atirekadhammo chaḍḍanīyadhammo [chaḍḍiyadhammo (sī. syā. pī.)]. Atha dve bhikkhū āgaccheyyuṃ jighacchādubbalya- [jighacchādubballa (sī. pī.)] paretā. Tyāhaṃ evaṃ vadeyyaṃ – ‘ahaṃ khomhi, bhikkhave, bhuttāvī pavārito paripuṇṇo pariyosito suhito yāvadattho; atthi ca me ayaṃ piṇḍapāto atirekadhammo chaḍḍanīyadhammo. Sace ākaṅkhatha, bhuñjatha, no ce tumhe bhuñjissatha [sace tumhe na bhuñjissatha (sī. syā. pī.)], idānāhaṃ appaharite vā chaḍḍessāmi, appāṇake vā udake opilāpessāmī’ti. Tatrekassa bhikkhuno evamassa – ‘bhagavā kho bhuttāvī pavārito paripuṇṇo pariyosito suhito yāvadattho; atthi cāyaṃ bhagavato piṇḍapāto atirekadhammo chaḍḍanīyadhammo. Sace mayaṃ na bhuñjissāma, idāni bhagavā appaharite vā chaḍḍessati, appāṇake vā udake opilāpessati’. Vuttaṃ kho panetaṃ bhagavatā – ‘dhammadāyādā me, bhikkhave, bhavatha, mā āmisadāyādā’ti. Āmisaññataraṃ kho panetaṃ, yadidaṃ piṇḍapāto. Yaṃnūnāhaṃ imaṃ piṇḍapātaṃ abhuñjitvā imināva jighacchādubbalyena evaṃ imaṃ rattindivaṃ [rattidivaṃ (ka.)] vītināmeyya’’nti. So taṃ piṇḍapātaṃ abhuñjitvā teneva jighacchādubbalyena evaṃ taṃ rattindivaṃ vītināmeyya. Atha dutiyassa bhikkhuno evamassa – ‘bhagavā kho bhuttāvī pavārito paripuṇṇo pariyosito suhito yāvadattho; atthi cāyaṃ bhagavato piṇḍapāto atirekadhammo chaḍḍanīyadhammo. Sace mayaṃ na bhuñjissāma, idāni bhagavā appaharite vā chaḍḍessati, appāṇake vā udake opilāpessati. Yaṃnūnāhaṃ imaṃ piṇḍapātaṃ bhuñjitvā jighacchādubbalyaṃ paṭivinodetvā [paṭivinetvā (sī. syā. pī.)] evaṃ imaṃ rattindivaṃ vītināmeyya’nti. So taṃ piṇḍapātaṃ bhuñjitvā jighacchādubbalyaṃ paṭivinodetvā evaṃ taṃ rattindivaṃ vītināmeyya. Kiñcāpi so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu taṃ piṇḍapātaṃ bhuñjitvā jighacchādubbalyaṃ paṭivinodetvā evaṃ taṃ rattindivaṃ vītināmeyya, atha kho asuyeva me purimo bhikkhu pujjataro ca pāsaṃsataro ca. Taṃ kissa hetu? Tañhi tassa, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno dīgharattaṃ appicchatāya santuṭṭhiyā sallekhāya subharatāya vīriyārambhāya saṃvattissati. Tasmātiha me, bhikkhave, dhammadāyādā bhavatha, mā āmisadāyādā. Atthi me tumhesu anukampā – ‘kinti me sāvakā dhammadāyādā bhaveyyuṃ, no āmisadāyādā’’’ti.

30. “Suppose, monks, I have finished eating, refused more food, am replete, satisfied, having eaten as much as I needed; and there is some almsfood left over, something extra to be discarded. Then two monks might arrive, overcome with hunger and weakness. I might say to them: ‘I, monks, have finished eating, refused more food, am replete, satisfied, having eaten as much as I needed. This almsfood of mine is extra, something to be discarded. If you wish, eat it. If you do not eat it, I will now discard it in a place with little greenery or drop it into water with no living beings.’ Then one monk might think: ‘The Blessed One has finished eating, refused more food, is replete, satisfied, having eaten as much as he needed. This almsfood of the Blessed One is extra, something to be discarded. If we do not eat it, the Blessed One will now discard it in a place with little greenery or drop it into water with no living beings.’ But this has been said by the Blessed One: ‘Be my heirs in the Dhamma, monks, not heirs in material things.’ Now this almsfood is a material thing. Suppose I do not eat this almsfood and endure this hunger and weakness, spending this day and night thus.’ So he would not eat that almsfood and would endure that hunger and weakness, spending that day and night thus. Then the second monk might think: ‘The Blessed One has finished eating, refused more food, is replete, satisfied, having eaten as much as he needed. This almsfood of the Blessed One is extra, something to be discarded. If we do not eat it, the Blessed One will now discard it in a place with little greenery or drop it into water with no living beings. Suppose I eat this almsfood, relieve this hunger and weakness, and spend this day and night thus.’ So he would eat that almsfood, relieve that hunger and weakness, and spend that day and night thus. Although, monks, that monk eats that almsfood, relieves that hunger and weakness, and spends that day and night thus, still the former monk is more worthy of respect and praise. Why is that? Because, monks, that will be for his long-term benefit, contributing to his being of few wishes, content, frugal, easy to support, and energetic in striving. Therefore, monks, be my heirs in the Dhamma, not heirs in material things. I have compassion for you, thinking: ‘May my disciples be heirs in the Dhamma, not heirs in material things.’”

Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṃ vatvāna [vatvā (sī. pī.) evamīdisesu ṭhānesu] sugato uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ pāvisi.

The Blessed One said this. Having said this, the Well-gone One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.

31. Tatra kho āyasmā sāriputto acirapakkantassa bhagavato bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘āvuso bhikkhave’’ti. ‘‘Āvuso’’ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato sāriputtassa paccassosuṃ. Āyasmā sāriputto etadavoca –

31.Then, not long after the Blessed One had left, Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks: “Friends, bhikkhus!” “Yes, friend,” those monks replied to Venerable Sāriputta. Venerable Sāriputta said this:

‘‘Kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso, satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekaṃ nānusikkhanti, kittāvatā ca pana satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekamanusikkhantī’’ti? ‘‘Dūratopi kho mayaṃ, āvuso, āgacchāma āyasmato sāriputtassa santike etassa bhāsitassa atthamaññātuṃ. Sādhu vatāyasmantaṃyeva sāriputtaṃ paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho; āyasmato sāriputtassa sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī’’ti. ‘‘Tena hāvuso, suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī’’ti. ‘‘Evamāvuso’’ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato sāriputtassa paccassosuṃ. Āyasmā sāriputto etadavoca –

“Friend, to what extent do the disciples of a Teacher who lives in seclusion not train in seclusion, and to what extent do the disciples of a Teacher who lives in seclusion train in seclusion?” “Friend, we have come from afar to the presence of Venerable Sāriputta to understand the meaning of this statement. It would be good if Venerable Sāriputta himself would illuminate the meaning of this statement. Having heard it from Venerable Sāriputta, the monks will retain it.” “Then, friend, listen and pay close attention. I will speak.” “Yes, friend,” those monks replied to Venerable Sāriputta. Venerable Sāriputta said this:

‘‘Kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso, satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekaṃ nānusikkhanti? Idhāvuso, satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekaṃ nānusikkhanti, yesañca dhammānaṃ satthā pahānamāha, te ca dhamme nappajahanti, bāhulikā [bāhullikā (syā.)] ca honti, sāthalikā, okkamane pubbaṅgamā, paviveke nikkhittadhurā. Tatrāvuso, therā bhikkhū tīhi ṭhānehi gārayhā bhavanti. ‘Satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekaṃ nānusikkhantī’ti – iminā paṭhamena ṭhānena therā bhikkhū gārayhā bhavanti. ‘Yesañca dhammānaṃ satthā pahānamāha te ca dhamme nappajahantī’ti – iminā dutiyena ṭhānena therā bhikkhū gārayhā bhavanti. ‘Bāhulikā ca, sāthalikā, okkamane pubbaṅgamā, paviveke nikkhittadhurā’ti – iminā tatiyena ṭhānena therā bhikkhū gārayhā bhavanti. Therā, āvuso, bhikkhū imehi tīhi ṭhānehi gārayhā bhavanti. Tatrāvuso, majjhimā bhikkhū…pe… navā bhikkhū tīhi ṭhānehi gārayhā bhavanti. ‘Satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekaṃ nānusikkhantī’ti – iminā paṭhamena ṭhānena navā bhikkhū gārayhā bhavanti. ‘Yesañca dhammānaṃ satthā pahānamāha te ca dhamme nappajahantī’ti – iminā dutiyena ṭhānena navā bhikkhū gārayhā bhavanti. ‘Bāhulikā ca honti, sāthalikā, okkamane pubbaṅgamā, paviveke nikkhittadhurā’ti – iminā tatiyena ṭhānena navā bhikkhū gārayhā bhavanti. Navā, āvuso, bhikkhū imehi tīhi ṭhānehi gārayhā bhavanti. Ettāvatā kho, āvuso, satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekaṃ nānusikkhanti.

“To what extent, friend, when the Teacher dwells in seclusion, do the disciples not train in seclusion? Here, friend, when the Teacher dwells in seclusion, the disciples do not train in seclusion when they do not abandon those qualities that the Teacher has said should be abandoned; and they are given to company, delight in company, are foremost in going out, and lay down the burden in seclusion. In this connection, friend, the senior monks are blameworthy on three grounds: ‘When the Teacher dwells in seclusion, the disciples do not train in seclusion’—on this first ground the senior monks are blameworthy. ‘They do not abandon those qualities that the Teacher has said should be abandoned’—on this second ground the senior monks are blameworthy. ‘They are given to company, delight in company, are foremost in going out, and lay down the burden in seclusion’—on this third ground the senior monks are blameworthy. Senior monks, friend, are blameworthy on these three grounds. In this connection, friend, the middle monks … the new monks are blameworthy on three grounds: ‘When the Teacher dwells in seclusion, the disciples do not train in seclusion’—on this first ground the new monks are blameworthy. ‘They do not abandon those qualities that the Teacher has said should be abandoned’—on this second ground the new monks are blameworthy. ‘They are given to company, delight in company, are foremost in going out, and lay down the burden in seclusion’—on this third ground the new monks are blameworthy. New monks, friend, are blameworthy on these three grounds. To this extent, friend, when the Teacher dwells in seclusion, the disciples do not train in seclusion.”

32. ‘‘Kittāvatā ca, panāvuso, satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekamanusikkhanti? Idhāvuso, satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekamanusikkhanti – yesañca dhammānaṃ satthā pahānamāha te ca dhamme pajahanti; na ca bāhulikā honti, na sāthalikā okkamane nikkhittadhurā paviveke pubbaṅgamā. Tatrāvuso, therā bhikkhū tīhi ṭhānehi pāsaṃsā bhavanti. ‘Satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekamanusikkhantī’ti – iminā paṭhamena ṭhānena therā bhikkhū pāsaṃsā bhavanti. ‘Yesañca dhammānaṃ satthā pahānamāha te ca dhamme pajahantī’ti – iminā dutiyena ṭhānena therā bhikkhū pāsaṃsā bhavanti. ‘Na ca bāhulikā, na sāthalikā okkamane nikkhittadhurā paviveke pubbaṅgamā’ti – iminā tatiyena ṭhānena therā bhikkhū pāsaṃsā bhavanti. Therā, āvuso, bhikkhū imehi tīhi ṭhānehi pāsaṃsā bhavanti. Tatrāvuso, majjhimā bhikkhū…pe… navā bhikkhū tīhi ṭhānehi pāsaṃsā bhavanti. ‘Satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekamanusikkhantī’ti – iminā paṭhamena ṭhānena navā bhikkhū pāsaṃsā bhavanti. ‘Yesañca dhammānaṃ satthā pahānamāha te ca dhamme pajahantī’ti – iminā dutiyena ṭhānena navā bhikkhū pāsaṃsā bhavanti. ‘Na ca bāhulikā, na sāthalikā okkamane nikkhittadhurā paviveke pubbaṅgamā’ti – iminā tatiyena ṭhānena navā bhikkhū pāsaṃsā bhavanti. Navā, āvuso, bhikkhū imehi tīhi ṭhānehi pāsaṃsā bhavanti. Ettāvatā kho, āvuso, satthu pavivittassa viharato sāvakā vivekamanusikkhanti.

32.“And to what extent, friends, do the disciples train in seclusion when the Teacher dwells in seclusion? Here, friends, when the Teacher dwells in seclusion, the disciples train in seclusion: they abandon those things which the Teacher has said should be abandoned; they are not gregarious or slothful; having relinquished the burden, they are foremost in seclusion. In this regard, friends, the elder monks are praised on three grounds. ‘When the Teacher dwells in seclusion, the disciples train in seclusion’—this is the first ground on which the elder monks are praised. ‘They abandon those things which the Teacher has said should be abandoned’—this is the second ground on which the elder monks are praised. ‘They are not gregarious or slothful; having relinquished the burden, they are foremost in seclusion’—this is the third ground on which the elder monks are praised. The elder monks, friends, are praised on these three grounds. In this regard, friends, the middle monks… the new monks are praised on three grounds. ‘When the Teacher dwells in seclusion, the disciples train in seclusion’—this is the first ground on which the new monks are praised. ‘They abandon those things which the Teacher has said should be abandoned’—this is the second ground on which the new monks are praised. ‘They are not gregarious or slothful; having relinquished the burden, they are foremost in seclusion’—this is the third ground on which the new monks are praised. The new monks, friends, are praised on these three grounds. Thus, friends, do the disciples train in seclusion when the Teacher dwells in seclusion.”

33. ‘‘Tatrāvuso, lobho ca pāpako doso ca pāpako. Lobhassa ca pahānāya dosassa ca pahānāya atthi majjhimā paṭipadā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati. Katamā ca sā, āvuso, majjhimā paṭipadā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ [seyyathīdaṃ (sī. syā. pī.)] – sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā sammākammanto sammāājīvo sammāvāyāmo sammāsati sammāsamādhi. Ayaṃ kho sā, āvuso, majjhimā paṭipadā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati.

33.“Here, friend, greed is unwholesome, and hatred is unwholesome. For the abandoning of greed and for the abandoning of hatred, there is a middle way which gives vision and knowledge, leading to peace, direct knowledge, full enlightenment, and Nibbāna. And what, friend, is that middle way which gives vision and knowledge, leading to peace, direct knowledge, full enlightenment, and Nibbāna? It is simply this Noble Eightfold Path, namely: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right samādhi. This, friend, is that middle way which gives vision and knowledge, leading to peace, direct knowledge, full enlightenment, and Nibbāna.”

‘‘Tatrāvuso, kodho ca pāpako upanāho ca pāpako…pe… makkho ca pāpako paḷāso ca pāpako, issā ca pāpikā maccherañca pāpakaṃ, māyā ca pāpikā sāṭheyyañca pāpakaṃ, thambho ca pāpako sārambho ca pāpako, māno ca pāpako atimāno ca pāpako, mado ca pāpako pamādo ca pāpako. Madassa ca pahānāya pamādassa ca pahānāya atthi majjhimā paṭipadā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati. Katamā ca sā, āvuso, majjhimā paṭipadā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṃ – sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā sammākammanto sammāājīvo sammāvāyāmo sammāsati sammāsamādhi. Ayaṃ kho sā, āvuso, majjhimā paṭipadā cakkhukaraṇī ñāṇakaraṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattatī’’ti.

“Here, friend, anger is unwholesome, and hostility is unwholesome, detraction is unwholesome, and malice is unwholesome, envy is unwholesome, and stinginess is unwholesome, deceit is unwholesome, and dishonesty is unwholesome, stubbornness is unwholesome, and impetuousness is unwholesome, conceit is unwholesome, and arrogance is unwholesome, infatuation is unwholesome, and negligence is unwholesome. And for the abandoning of infatuation and negligence, there is the middle way which gives vision and knowledge, leading to peace, direct knowledge, full enlightenment, and Nibbāna. And what, friend, is that middle way which gives vision and knowledge, leading to peace, direct knowledge, full enlightenment, and Nibbāna? It is simply this Noble Eightfold Path, that is to say: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right samādhi. This, friend, is that middle way which gives vision and knowledge, leading to peace, direct knowledge, full enlightenment, and Nibbāna.”

Idamavocāyasmā sāriputto. Attamanā te bhikkhū āyasmato sāriputtassa bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti.

This was said by Venerable Sāriputta. The monks, delighted, rejoiced at the words of Venerable Sāriputta.

Dhammadāyādasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ tatiyaṃ.

The Dhammadāyāda Sutta, the third, is concluded.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA18.3]]; [[MA88]] | M i 12 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA18.3]], [[MA88]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN5]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN3]]
> ◄  [[mn2-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn4-deepseek-pali]] ►
