---
sutta_code: "MN39"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahāassapura Sutta "
  - "Discourse at Assapura Longer"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN39]]
> ◄  [[mn38-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn40-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 39. Mahāassapurasuttaṃ

## 39. The Great Assapura Discourse

415. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā aṅgesu viharati assapuraṃ nāma aṅgānaṃ nigamo. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘bhikkhavo’’ti. ‘‘Bhadante’’ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. Bhagavā etadavoca –

415.Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling among the Angas at a town of the Angas named Assapura. There the Blessed One addressed the monks: “Monks.” “Venerable sir,” those monks replied to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said this:

‘‘Samaṇā samaṇāti vo, bhikkhave, jano sañjānāti. Tumhe ca pana ‘ke tumhe’ti puṭṭhā samānā ‘samaṇāmhā’ti paṭijānātha; tesaṃ vo, bhikkhave, evaṃsamaññānaṃ sataṃ evaṃpaṭiññānaṃ sataṃ ‘ye dhammā samaṇakaraṇā ca brāhmaṇakaraṇā ca te dhamme samādāya vattissāma, evaṃ no ayaṃ amhākaṃ samaññā ca saccā bhavissati paṭiññā ca bhūtā. Yesañca mayaṃ cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhāraṃ paribhuñjāma, tesaṃ te kārā amhesu mahapphalā bhavissanti mahānisaṃsā, amhākañcevāyaṃ pabbajjā avañjhā bhavissati saphalā saudrayā’ti. Evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ.

“People recognize you, monks, as ‘ascetics, ascetics.’ And when asked, ‘Who are you?’ you declare, ‘We are ascetics.’ With this designation and declaration, monks, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will undertake and practice those qualities that make one an ascetic and a brahmin, so that our designation may be true and our declaration genuine. And the gifts of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicinal requisites that we use will bring great fruit and great benefit to those who give them; and this our going forth will not be in vain, but fruitful and rewarding.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves.”

416. ‘‘Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā samaṇakaraṇā ca brāhmaṇakaraṇā ca? ‘Hirottappena samannāgatā bhavissāmā’ti evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi, sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

416.“And what, monks, are the qualities that make one an ascetic and a brahmin? ‘We will be endowed with moral shame and moral dread.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves. But if, monks, it should occur to you: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and moral dread; this much is enough, this much has been accomplished, the goal of asceticism has been reached, there is nothing more to be done,’ then you may become content with just that. I declare to you, monks, I announce to you, monks: ‘Do not let the goal of asceticism be lost to you who are seeking the goal of asceticism, while there is still more to be done.’

417. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? ‘Parisuddho no kāyasamācāro bhavissati uttāno vivaṭo na ca chiddavā saṃvuto ca. Tāya ca pana parisuddhakāyasamācāratāya nevattānukkaṃsessāma na paraṃ vambhessāmā’ti [nevattānukkaṃsissāma na paraṃ vambhissāmāti (sabbattha)] evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, parisuddho no kāyasamācāro; alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi, sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

417.“And what more, monks, is to be done? ‘Our bodily conduct will be pure, open, unconcealed, without flaw, and restrained. And because of this pure bodily conduct, we will neither exalt ourselves nor disparage others.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves. But if, monks, it should occur to you: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and moral dread, our bodily conduct is pure; this much is enough, this much has been accomplished, the goal of asceticism has been reached, there is nothing more to be done,’ then you may become content with just that. I declare to you, monks, I announce to you, monks: ‘Do not let the goal of asceticism be lost to you who are seeking the goal of asceticism, while there is still more to be done.’

418. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? ‘Parisuddho no vacīsamācāro bhavissati uttāno vivaṭo na ca chiddavā saṃvuto ca. Tāya ca pana parisuddhavacīsamācāratāya nevattānukkaṃsessāma na paraṃ vambhessāmā’ti evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, parisuddho no kāyasamācāro, parisuddho vacīsamācāro; alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi, sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

418.“And what more, monks, is to be done? ‘Our verbal conduct will be pure, open, unconcealed, without flaw, and restrained. And because of this pure verbal conduct, we will neither exalt ourselves nor disparage others.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves. But if, monks, it should occur to you: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and moral dread, our bodily conduct is pure, our verbal conduct is pure; this much is enough, this much has been accomplished, the goal of asceticism has been reached, there is nothing more to be done,’ then you may become content with just that. I declare to you, monks, I announce to you, monks: ‘Do not let the goal of asceticism be lost to you who are seeking the goal of asceticism, while there is still more to be done.’

419. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? ‘Parisuddho no manosamācāro bhavissati uttāno vivaṭo na ca chiddavā saṃvuto ca. Tāya ca pana parisuddhamanosamācāratāya nevattānukkaṃsessāma na paraṃ vambhessāmā’ti evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, parisuddho no kāyasamācāro, parisuddho vacīsamācāro, parisuddho manosamācāro; alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi, sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

419.“And what more, monks, is to be done? ‘Our mental conduct will be pure, open, unconcealed, without flaw, and restrained. And because of this pure mental conduct, we will neither exalt ourselves nor disparage others.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves. But if, monks, it should occur to you: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and moral dread, our bodily conduct is pure, our verbal conduct is pure, our mental conduct is pure; this much is enough, this much has been accomplished, the goal of asceticism has been reached, there is nothing more to be done,’ then you may become content with just that. I declare to you, monks, I announce to you, monks: ‘Do not let the goal of asceticism be lost to you who are seeking the goal of asceticism, while there is still more to be done.’

420. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? ‘Parisuddho no ājīvo bhavissati uttāno vivaṭo na ca chiddavā saṃvuto ca. Tāya ca pana parisuddhājīvatāya nevattānukkaṃsessāma na paraṃ vambhessāmā’ti evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, parisuddho no kāyasamācāro, parisuddho vacīsamācāro, parisuddho manosamācāro, parisuddho ājīvo; alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi, sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

420.“And what more, monks, is to be done? ‘Our livelihood will be pure, open, unconcealed, without flaw, and restrained. And because of this pure livelihood, we will neither exalt ourselves nor disparage others.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves. But if, monks, it should occur to you: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and moral dread, our bodily conduct is pure, our verbal conduct is pure, our mental conduct is pure, our livelihood is pure; this much is enough, this much has been accomplished, the goal of asceticism has been reached, there is nothing more to be done,’ then you may become content with just that. I declare to you, monks, I announce to you, monks: ‘Do not let the goal of asceticism be lost to you who are seeking the goal of asceticism, while there is still more to be done.’

421. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? ‘Indriyesu guttadvārā bhavissāma; cakkhunā rūpaṃ disvā na nimittaggāhī nānubyañjanaggāhī. Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ cakkhundriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjissāma, rakkhissāma cakkhundriyaṃ, cakkhundriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjissāma. Sotena saddaṃ sutvā…pe… ghānena gandhaṃ ghāyitvā…pe… jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā…pe… kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṃ phusitvā…pe… manasā dhammaṃ viññāya na nimittaggāhī nānubyañjanaggāhī. Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṃ manindriyaṃ asaṃvutaṃ viharantaṃ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṃ, tassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjissāma, rakkhissāma manindriyaṃ, manindriye saṃvaraṃ āpajjissāmā’ti evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, parisuddho no kāyasamācāro, parisuddho vacīsamācāro, parisuddho manosamācāro, parisuddho ājīvo, indriyesumha guttadvārā; alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi, sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

421.“And what more, monks, is to be done? ‘We will be those with guarded sense doors. Having seen a form with the eye, we will not be those who grasp at signs or details. Because, if we were to dwell with the eye faculty unguarded, evil, unwholesome qualities of covetousness and distress might flow in; we will practice for its restraint, we will guard the eye faculty, and we will undertake restraint of the eye faculty. Having heard a sound with the ear… Having smelled an odor with the nose… Having tasted a flavor with the tongue… Having felt a touch with the body… Having cognized a mental object with the mind, we will not be those who grasp at signs or details. Because, if we were to dwell with the mind faculty unguarded, evil, unwholesome qualities of covetousness and distress might flow in; we will practice for its restraint, we will guard the mind faculty, and we will undertake restraint of the mind faculty.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves. But if, monks, it should occur to you: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and moral dread, our bodily conduct is pure, our verbal conduct is pure, our mental conduct is pure, our livelihood is pure, we are those with guarded sense doors; this much is enough, this much has been accomplished, the goal of asceticism has been reached, there is nothing more to be done,’ then you may become content with just that. I declare to you, monks, I announce to you, monks: ‘Do not let the goal of asceticism be lost to you who are seeking the goal of asceticism, while there is still more to be done.’

422. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? ‘Bhojane mattaññuno bhavissāma, paṭisaṅkhā yoniso āhāraṃ āharissāma, neva davāya na madāya na maṇḍanāya na vibhūsanāya yāvadeva imassa kāyassa ṭhitiyā yāpanāya, vihiṃsūparatiyā, brahmacariyānuggahāya, iti purāṇañca vedanaṃ paṭihaṅkhāma navañca vedanaṃ na uppādessāma, yātrā ca no bhavissati, anavajjatā ca, phāsu vihāro cā’ti evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, parisuddho no kāyasamācāro, parisuddho vacīsamācāro, parisuddho manosamācāro, parisuddho ājīvo, indriyesumha guttadvārā, bhojane mattaññuno; alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo, sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

422.“And what more, monks, is to be done? ‘We will be moderate in eating, reflecting wisely on our food. We will eat not for amusement, nor for intoxication, nor for adornment, nor for beautification, but only for the maintenance and sustenance of this body, for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy life, thinking: “Thus, we will ward off old feelings and not arouse new feelings, and we will be healthy, blameless, and dwell at ease.”’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves. But if, monks, it should occur to you: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and moral dread, our bodily conduct is pure, our verbal conduct is pure, our mental conduct is pure, our livelihood is pure, we are those with guarded sense doors, and we are moderate in eating; this much is enough, this much has been accomplished, the goal of asceticism has been reached, there is nothing more to be done,’ then you may become content with just that. I declare to you, monks, I announce to you, monks: ‘Do not let the goal of asceticism be lost to you who are seeking the goal of asceticism, while there is still more to be done.’

423. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? ‘Jāgariyaṃ anuyuttā bhavissāma, divasaṃ caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodhessāma. Rattiyā paṭhamaṃ yāmaṃ caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodhessāma. Rattiyā majjhimaṃ yāmaṃ dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappessāma pāde pādaṃ accādhāya, sato sampajāno uṭṭhānasaññaṃ manasi karitvā. Rattiyā pacchimaṃ yāmaṃ paccuṭṭhāya caṅkamena nisajjāya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodhessāmā’ti, evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, parisuddho no kāyasamācāro, parisuddho vacīsamācāro, parisuddho manosamācāro, parisuddho ājīvo, indriyesumha guttadvārā, bhojane mattaññuno, jāgariyaṃ anuyuttā; alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti, tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo, sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

423.“What more is to be done, bhikkhus? ‘We will be devoted to wakefulness. During the day, walking and sitting, we will purify our minds of obstructive states. In the first watch of the night, walking and sitting, we will purify our minds of obstructive states. In the middle watch of the night, we will assume the lion’s posture, lying down on the right side, placing one foot upon the other, mindful and clearly comprehending, focusing on the thought of rising. In the last watch of the night, rising up, walking and sitting, we will purify our minds of obstructive states.’ Thus, bhikkhus, should you train yourselves. It may be, bhikkhus, that you think thus: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct is purified, our verbal conduct is purified, our mental conduct is purified, our livelihood is purified, our sense doors are guarded, we are moderate in eating, we are devoted to wakefulness; enough has been done, this is as much as needs to be done, we have attained the goal of the ascetic life, there is nothing more for us to do,’ and you might be content with just that much. I declare to you, bhikkhus, I announce to you, bhikkhus: ‘Do not let the goal of the ascetic life be lost by those who seek it, when there is still more to be done.’

424. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? ‘Satisampajaññena samannāgatā bhavissāma, abhikkante paṭikkante sampajānakārī, ālokite vilokite sampajānakārī, samiñjite pasārite sampajānakārī, saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇe sampajānakārī, asite pīte khāyite sāyite sampajānakārī, uccārapassāvakamme sampajānakārī, gate ṭhite nisinne sutte jāgarite bhāsite tuṇhībhāve sampajānakārī’ti, evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṃ. Siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, tumhākaṃ evamassa – ‘hirottappenamha samannāgatā, parisuddho no kāyasamācāro, parisuddho vacīsamācāro, parisuddho manosamācāro, parisuddho ājīvo, indriyesumha guttadvārā, bhojane mattaññuno, jāgariyaṃ anuyuttā, satisampajaññena samannāgatā; alamettāvatā katamettāvatā, anuppatto no sāmaññattho, natthi no kiñci uttariṃ karaṇīya’nti tāvatakeneva tuṭṭhiṃ āpajjeyyātha. Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave – ‘mā vo, sāmaññatthikānaṃ sataṃ sāmaññattho parihāyi sati uttariṃ karaṇīye’.

424.“And what, bhikkhus, is there further to be done? ‘We will be endowed with mindfulness and clear comprehension, acting with clear comprehension when going forward and returning, when looking ahead and looking aside, when bending and stretching, when wearing robes and carrying bowl and outer robe, when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting, when defecating and urinating, when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.’ Thus, bhikkhus, should you train yourselves. It may be, bhikkhus, that you think thus: ‘We are endowed with moral shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct is purified, our verbal conduct is purified, our mental conduct is purified, our livelihood is purified, we are restrained in the sense doors, we are moderate in eating, devoted to wakefulness, endowed with mindfulness and clear comprehension; this much is enough, this much has been accomplished, we have attained the goal of the ascetic life, there is nothing further to be done,’ and you might be content with just this much. I declare to you, bhikkhus, I announce to you, bhikkhus: ‘Do not let the goal of the ascetic life be lost by those who seek that goal, while there is still more to be done.’

425. ‘‘Kiñca, bhikkhave, uttariṃ karaṇīyaṃ? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivittaṃ senāsanaṃ bhajati – araññaṃ rukkhamūlaṃ pabbataṃ kandaraṃ giriguhaṃ susānaṃ vanappatthaṃ abbhokāsaṃ palālapuñjaṃ. So pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā, ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. So abhijjhaṃ loke pahāya vigatābhijjhena cetasā viharati, abhijjhāya cittaṃ parisodheti; byāpādapadosaṃ pahāya abyāpannacitto viharati, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī, byāpādapadosā cittaṃ parisodheti; thīnamiddhaṃ pahāya vigatathīnamiddho viharati, ālokasaññī sato sampajāno, thīnamiddhā cittaṃ parisodheti; uddhaccakukkuccaṃ pahāya anuddhato viharati, ajjhattaṃ vūpasantacitto, uddhaccakukkuccā cittaṃ parisodheti; vicikicchaṃ pahāya tiṇṇavicikiccho viharati, akathaṃkathī kusalesu dhammesu, vicikicchāya cittaṃ parisodheti.

425.“And what further, bhikkhus, is to be done? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu resorts to a secluded dwelling—the forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw. Having returned from his almsround after the meal, he sits down, crosses his legs, holds his body erect, and establishes mindfulness in front of him. Abandoning covetousness for the world, he dwells with a mind free from covetousness; he purifies his mind from covetousness. Abandoning ill will and hatred, he dwells with a mind free from ill will, compassionate for the welfare of all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill will and hatred. Abandoning sloth and torpor, he dwells free from sloth and torpor, perceiving light, mindful and clearly comprehending; he purifies his mind from sloth and torpor. Abandoning restlessness and remorse, he dwells unagitated, with a mind inwardly stilled; he purifies his mind from restlessness and remorse. Abandoning doubt, he dwells having overcome doubt, with no perplexity about wholesome qualities; he purifies his mind from doubt.

426. ‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso iṇaṃ ādāya kammante payojeyya. Tassa te kammantā samijjheyyuṃ [sampajjeyyuṃ (syā. kaṃ. ka.)]. So yāni ca porāṇāni iṇamūlāni tāni ca byantī [byantiṃ (ka.), byanti (pī.)] kareyya, siyā cassa uttariṃ avasiṭṭhaṃ dārabharaṇāya. Tassa evamassa – ‘ahaṃ kho pubbe iṇaṃ ādāya kammante payojesiṃ, tassa me te kammantā samijjhiṃsu. Sohaṃ yāni ca porāṇāni iṇamūlāni tāni ca byantī akāsiṃ, atthi ca me uttariṃ avasiṭṭhaṃ dārabharaṇāyā’ti. So tatonidānaṃ labhetha pāmojjaṃ, adhigaccheyya somanassaṃ.

426.“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were to take out a loan and engage in business. His business succeeds. He pays off the original debt he had incurred, and there is some remaining over for maintaining his wife. He would think: ‘Before, I took out a loan and engaged in business, and my business succeeded. I have paid off the original debt, and there is some remaining over for maintaining my wife.’ Because of that, he would obtain joy and attain gladness.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso ābādhiko assa dukkhito bāḷhagilāno, bhattañcassa nacchādeyya, na cassa kāye balamattā. So aparena samayena tamhā ābādhā mucceyya, bhattañcassa chādeyya, siyā cassa kāye balamattā. Tassa evamassa – ‘ahaṃ kho pubbe ābādhiko ahosiṃ dukkhito bāḷhagilāno, bhattañca me nacchādesi, na ca me āsi kāye balamattā, somhi etarahi tamhā ābādhā mutto, bhattañca me chādeti, atthi ca me kāye balamattā’ti. So tatonidānaṃ labhetha pāmojjaṃ, adhigaccheyya somanassaṃ.

“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were afflicted, suffering, gravely ill. He would not relish his food, and there would be no measure of strength in his body. After some time, he would be freed from that affliction. He would relish his food, and there would be a measure of strength in his body. He would think: ‘Before, I was afflicted, suffering, gravely ill. I did not relish my food, and there was no measure of strength in my body. Now I am freed from that affliction. I relish my food, and there is a measure of strength in my body.’ Because of that, he would obtain joy and attain gladness.”

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso bandhanāgāre baddho assa. So aparena samayena tamhā bandhanā mucceyya sotthinā abbhayena [abyayena (sī. pī.)], na cassa kiñci bhogānaṃ vayo. Tassa evamassa – ‘ahaṃ kho pubbe bandhanāgāre baddho ahosiṃ, somhi etarahi tamhā bandhanā mutto, sotthinā abbhayena, natthi ca me kiñci bhogānaṃ vayo’ti. So tatonidānaṃ labhetha pāmojjaṃ, adhigaccheyya somanassaṃ.

“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were imprisoned in a jail. After some time he would be released from that imprisonment, safe and sound, with no loss of his possessions. He would think: ‘Before, I was imprisoned in a jail. Now I have been released from that imprisonment, safe and sound, with no loss of my possessions.’ Because of that, he would obtain joy and attain gladness.”

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso dāso assa anattādhīno parādhīno na yenakāmaṃgamo. So aparena samayena tamhā dāsabyā mucceyya attādhīno aparādhīno bhujisso yenakāmaṃgamo. Tassa evamassa – ‘ahaṃ kho pubbe dāso ahosiṃ anattādhīno parādhīno na yenakāmaṃgamo, somhi etarahi tamhā dāsabyā mutto attādhīno aparādhīno bhujisso yenakāmaṃgamo’ti. So tatonidānaṃ labhetha pāmojjaṃ, adhigaccheyya somanassaṃ.

“Bhikkhus, suppose there was a man who was a slave, not his own master, dependent on others, unable to go where he wished. Then after some time, he might be freed from that slavery, become his own master, independent, able to go where he wished. He would think: ‘Before, I was a slave, not my own master, dependent on others, unable to go where I wished. Now I am freed from that slavery, my own master, independent, able to go where I wish.’ Because of that, he would obtain joy and attain gladness.”

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso sadhano sabhogo kantāraddhānamaggaṃ paṭipajjeyya [sīlakkhandhavaggapāḷiyā kiñci visadisaṃ]. So aparena samayena tamhā kantārā nitthareyya sotthinā abbhayena, na cassa kiñci bhogānaṃ vayo. Tassa evamassa – ‘ahaṃ kho pubbe sadhano sabhogo kantāraddhānamaggaṃ paṭipajjiṃ. Somhi etarahi tamhā kantārā nitthiṇṇo sotthinā abbhayena, natthi ca me kiñci bhogānaṃ vayo’ti. So tatonidānaṃ labhetha pāmojjaṃ, adhigaccheyya somanassaṃ.

“Bhikkhus, suppose there was a man who was wealthy and well-supplied, traveling along a dangerous wilderness road. After some time, he might safely cross beyond that wilderness, unharmed, with no loss of his possessions. He would think: ‘Before, I was wealthy and well-supplied, traveling along a dangerous wilderness road. Now I have safely crossed beyond that wilderness, unharmed, and I have lost none of my possessions.’ Because of that, he would obtain joy and attain gladness.”

‘‘Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yathā iṇaṃ yathā rogaṃ yathā bandhanāgāraṃ yathā dāsabyaṃ yathā kantāraddhānamaggaṃ, ime pañca nīvaraṇe appahīne attani samanupassati. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, āṇaṇyaṃ yathā ārogyaṃ yathā bandhanāmokkhaṃ yathā bhujissaṃ yathā khemantabhūmiṃ; evameva bhikkhu ime pañca nīvaraṇe pahīne attani samanupassati.

“In the same way, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu regards these five hindrances, when unabandoned in himself, as a debt, a sickness, a prison, slavery, and a dangerous road through the wilderness. Just as a debt paid, health restored, release from prison, freedom, and a safe place; so too, a bhikkhu regards these five hindrances, when abandoned in himself.”

427. ‘‘So ime pañca nīvaraṇe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraṇe, vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi, savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. So imameva kāyaṃ vivekajena pītisukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa vivekajena pītisukhena apphuṭaṃ hoti. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dakkho nhāpako [nahāpako (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] vā nhāpakantevāsī vā kaṃsathāle nhānīyacuṇṇāni [nahānīyacuṇṇāni (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] ākiritvā udakena paripphosakaṃ paripphosakaṃ sanneyya. Sāyaṃ nhānīyapiṇḍi snehānugatā snehaparetā santarabāhirā, phuṭā snehena na ca pagghariṇī. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu imameva kāyaṃ vivekajena pītisukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa vivekajena pītisukhena apphuṭaṃ hoti.

427.“Having abandoned these five hindrances—corruptions of the mind that weaken wisdom—quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by thought and examination, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion. He drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades his body with the rapture and happiness born of seclusion, so that there is no part of his entire body unpervaded by rapture and happiness born of seclusion. Just as, bhikkhus, a skilled bath attendant or his apprentice would sprinkle bath powder in a metal basin with water again and again, and knead it together, so that the ball of bath powder becomes saturated with moisture, permeated within and without, and yet does not drip. In the same way, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades his body with the rapture and happiness born of seclusion, so that there is no part of his entire body unpervaded by rapture and happiness born of seclusion.

428. ‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. So imameva kāyaṃ samādhijena pītisukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa samādhijena pītisukhena apphuṭaṃ hoti. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, udakarahado ubbhidodako [ubbhitodako (ka.)]. Tassa nevassa puratthimāya disāya udakassa āyamukhaṃ, na pacchimāya disāya udakassa āyamukhaṃ, na uttarāya disāya udakassa āyamukhaṃ, na dakkhiṇāya disāya udakassa āyamukhaṃ, devo ca na kālena kālaṃ sammādhāraṃ anuppaveccheyya. Atha kho tamhāva udakarahadā sītā vāridhārā ubbhijjitvā tameva udakarahadaṃ sītena vārinā abhisandeyya parisandeyya paripūreyya paripphareyya, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato udakarahadassa sītena vārinā apphuṭaṃ assa. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu imameva kāyaṃ samādhijena pītisukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa samādhijena pītisukhena apphuṭaṃ hoti.

428.Furthermore, monks, a monk, with the stilling of thought and examination, enters and abides in the second jhāna, which has inner confidence and unification of mind, is without thought and examination, and has rapture and happiness born of samādhi. He permeates, drenches, fills, and suffuses this very body with the rapture and happiness born of samādhi, so that there is no part of his entire body that is not touched by the rapture and happiness born of samādhi. Just as, monks, a lake fed by an underground spring—with no inflow from the east, west, north, or south, and when the rain god does not now and then supply showers—still a cool stream of water would well up from that very lake, suffusing, drenching, filling, and overflowing it, so that there would be no part of the entire lake that was not touched by the cool water. In the same way, monks, a monk permeates this very body with the rapture and happiness born of samādhi, so that there is no part of his entire body that is not touched by the rapture and happiness born of samādhi.

429. ‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca viharati, sato ca sampajāno, sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedeti, yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti – ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. So imameva kāyaṃ nippītikena sukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa nippītikena sukhena apphuṭaṃ hoti. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uppaliniyaṃ vā paduminiyaṃ vā puṇḍarīkiniyaṃ vā appekaccāni uppalāni vā padumāni vā puṇḍarīkāni vā udake jātāni udake saṃvaḍḍhāni udakānuggatāni antonimuggaposīni, tāni yāva caggā yāva ca mūlā sītena vārinā abhisannāni parisannāni paripūrāni paripphuṭāni, nāssa [na nesaṃ (sī.)] kiñci sabbāvataṃ uppalānaṃ vā padumānaṃ vā puṇḍarīkānaṃ vā sītena vārinā apphuṭaṃ assa. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu imameva kāyaṃ nippītikena sukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa nippītikena sukhena apphuṭaṃ hoti.

429.Furthermore, monks, a monk, with the fading away of rapture, dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending, experiences pleasure with the body. He attains and abides in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare: 'He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells pleasurably.' He permeates, drenches, fills, and suffuses this very body with pleasure devoid of rapture, so that there is no part of his entire body untouched by pleasure devoid of rapture. Just as, monks, in a pond of blue lotuses, or red lotuses, or white lotuses, some lotuses—born in the water, grown in the water, rising no further than the water, nourished under the water—are permeated, drenched, filled, and suffused with cool water from their tips down to their roots, so that there is no part of those lotuses untouched by cool water. In the same way, monks, a monk permeates this very body with pleasure devoid of rapture, so that there is no part of his entire body untouched by pleasure devoid of rapture.

430. ‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā, pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā, adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. So imameva kāyaṃ parisuddhena cetasā pariyodātena pharitvā nisinno hoti, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa parisuddhena cetasā pariyodātena apphuṭaṃ hoti. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso odātena vatthena sasīsaṃ pārupetvā nisinno assa, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa odātena vatthena apphuṭaṃ assa. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu imameva kāyaṃ parisuddhena cetasā pariyodātena pharitvā nisinno hoti, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa parisuddhena cetasā pariyodātena apphuṭaṃ hoti.

430.Furthermore, monks, a monk, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, attains and dwells in the fourth jhāna, which is neither painful nor pleasant and features the purity of mindfulness due to equanimity. He sits pervading this very body with a pure and bright mind, so that there is no part of his entire body unfused by the pure and bright mind. Just as, monks, a man might sit wrapped from head to foot in a white cloth, so that there would be no part of his entire body not covered by the white cloth—so too, monks, a monk sits pervading this very body with a pure and bright mind, so that there is no part of his entire body unfused by the pure and bright mind.

431. ‘‘So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte pubbenivāsānussatiñāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. So anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, seyyathidaṃ – ekampi jātiṃ, dvepi jātiyo…pe… iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso sakamhā gāmā aññaṃ gāmaṃ gaccheyya, tamhāpi gāmā aññaṃ gāmaṃ gaccheyya, so tamhā gāmā sakaṃyeva gāmaṃ paccāgaccheyya. Tassa evamassa – ‘ahaṃ kho sakamhā gāmā amuṃ gāmaṃ agacchiṃ [agacchiṃ (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)], tatrapi evaṃ aṭṭhāsiṃ evaṃ nisīdiṃ evaṃ abhāsiṃ evaṃ tuṇhī ahosiṃ; tamhāpi gāmā amuṃ gāmaṃ agacchiṃ, tatrapi evaṃ aṭṭhāsiṃ evaṃ nisīdiṃ evaṃ abhāsiṃ evaṃ tuṇhī ahosiṃ; somhi tamhā gāmā sakaṃyeva gāmaṃ paccāgato’ti. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, seyyathidaṃ – ekampi jātiṃ dvepi jātiyo…pe… iti sākāraṃ sauddesaṃ anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati.

431.When his mind is thus collected, purified, bright, unblemished, rid of defilements, malleable, workable, firm, and immovable, he directs it to the knowledge of the recollection of past lives. He recollects his manifold past lives, such as one birth, two births…(and so on)…with their aspects and details. Just as, monks, a man might go from his own village to another village, from that village to yet another village, and then return from that village back to his own village. He would think: ‘I went from my own village to that village, where I stood in this way, sat in this way, spoke in this way, and remained silent in this way. From that village I went to another village, where I stood in this way, sat in this way, spoke in this way, and remained silent in this way. And then I returned from that village back to my own village.’ In the same way, monks, a monk recollects his manifold past lives, such as one birth, two births…(and so on)…with their aspects and details.

432. ‘‘So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte sattānaṃ cutūpapātañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. So dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe, sugate duggate, yathākammūpage satte pajānāti…pe… seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dve agārā sadvārā [sannadvārā (ka.)]. Tattha cakkhumā puriso majjhe ṭhito passeyya manusse gehaṃ pavisantepi nikkhamantepi, anucaṅkamantepi anuvicarantepi. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe, sugate duggate yathākammūpage satte pajānāti…pe….

432.When his mind is thus collected, purified, cleansed, spotless, rid of defilements, malleable, workable, steady, and unshakeable, he directs it to the knowledge of the passing away and arising of beings. With the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, he sees beings passing away and arising—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate—and he understands how beings go according to their actions... (and so on)... Just as, monks, if there were two houses with doors, and a man with good eyesight standing in between them would see people entering and leaving, walking about and wandering around—so too, monks, a monk with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, sees beings passing away and arising—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate—and he understands how beings go according to their actions... (and so on)....

433. ‘‘So evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte āsavānaṃ khayañāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. So ‘idaṃ dukkha’nti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. ‘Ime āsavā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ āsavasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ āsavanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ āsavanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Tassa evaṃ jānato evaṃ passato kāmāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, bhavāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati, avijjāsavāpi cittaṃ vimuccati. Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti – ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti.

433.When his mind is thus collected, purified, bright, unblemished, rid of defilements, malleable, workable, firm, and having attained imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the destruction of the taints. He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the path leading to the cessation of suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘These are the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the path leading to the cessation of the taints.’ As he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, his mind is liberated from the taint of being, his mind is liberated from the taint of ignorance. When liberated, there is knowledge that he is liberated. He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pabbatasaṅkhepe udakarahado accho vippasanno anāvilo. Tattha cakkhumā puriso tīre ṭhito passeyya sippisambukampi [sippikasambukampi (syā. kaṃ. ka.)] sakkharakathalampi macchagumbampi, carantampi tiṭṭhantampi. Tassa evamassa – ‘ayaṃ kho udakarahado accho vippasanno anāvilo. Tatrime sippisambukāpi sakkharakathalāpi macchagumbāpi carantipi tiṭṭhantipīti. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘idaṃ dukkha’nti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānāti.

Just as, monks, if there were a mountain depression with a lake of water, clear, limpid, and undisturbed, a monk with good eyes standing on the bank would see oyster shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also shoals of fish moving about or staying still, and it would occur to him: 'This lake is clear, limpid, and undisturbed. Here are these oyster shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also these shoals of fish moving about or staying still.' In the same way, monks, a monk understands as it actually is: 'This is suffering'... He understands: 'There is no further coming to any state of being.'

434. ‘‘Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘samaṇo’ itipi ‘brāhmaṇo’itipi ‘nhātako’itipi ‘vedagū’itipi ‘sottiyo’itipi ‘ariyo’itipi ‘arahaṃ’itipi. Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu samaṇo hoti? Samitāssa honti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, saṃkilesikā, ponobbhavikā, sadarā, dukkhavipākā, āyatiṃ, jātijarāmaraṇiyā. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu samaṇo hoti.

434.This, monks, is said to be a monk who is a ‘recluse,’ a ‘brahmin,’ a ‘washer,’ a ‘knower of the Vedas,’ a ‘learned one,’ a ‘noble one,’ a ‘worthy one.’ And how, monks, is a monk a recluse? Evil, unwholesome qualities—defiling, leading to renewed existence, fraught with distress, resulting in suffering, leading to future birth, aging, and death—are stilled in him. Thus, monks, a monk is a recluse.

‘‘Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu brāhmaṇo hoti? Bāhitāssa honti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, saṃkilesikā, ponobbhavikā, sadarā, dukkhavipākā, āyatiṃ, jātijarāmaraṇiyā. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu brāhmaṇo hoti.

And how, monks, is a monk a brahmin? He has banished evil, unwholesome qualities that are defiling, leading to renewed existence, fraught with distress, resulting in suffering, and conducive to future birth, aging, and death. Thus, monks, a monk is a brahmin.

‘‘Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nhātako [nahātako (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] hoti? Nhātāssa honti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, saṃkilesikā, ponobbhavikā, sadarā, dukkhavipākā, āyatiṃ, jātijarāmaraṇiyā. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu nhātako hoti.

And how, monks, is a monk a washer? He has bathed off evil, unwholesome qualities that defile, lead to renewed existence, bring distress, result in suffering, and conduce to future birth, aging, and death. Thus, monks, a monk is a washer.

‘‘Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vedagū hoti? Viditāssa honti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, saṃkilesikā, ponobbhavikā, sadarā, dukkhavipākā, āyatiṃ, jātijarāmaraṇiyā. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vedagū hoti.

And how, monks, is a monk a knower? He has known evil unwholesome states that defile, lead to renewed existence, are fraught with anguish, result in suffering, and are conducive to future birth, aging, and death. Thus, monks, a monk is a knower.

‘‘Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sottiyo hoti? Nissutāssa honti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, saṃkilesikā, ponobbhavikā, sadarā, dukkhavipākā, āyatiṃ, jātijarāmaraṇiyā. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sottiyo hoti.

And how, monks, is a monk one who is purified? Evil unwholesome states that defile, lead to renewed existence, are fraught with anguish, result in suffering, and are conducive to future birth, aging, and death have been removed for him. Thus, monks, a monk is one who is purified.

‘‘Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyo hoti? Ārakāssa honti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, saṃkilesikā, ponobbhavikā, sadarā, dukkhavipākā, āyatiṃ, jātijarāmaraṇiyā. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ariyo hoti.

And how, monks, is a monk noble? Evil unwholesome states that defile, lead to renewed existence, are fraught with anguish, result in suffering, and are conducive to future birth, aging, and death are far from him. Thus, monks, a monk is noble.

‘‘Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu arahaṃ hoti? Ārakāssa honti pāpakā akusalā dhammā, saṃkilesikā, ponobbhavikā, sadarā, dukkhavipākā, āyatiṃ, jātijarāmaraṇiyā. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu arahaṃ hotī’’ti.

And how, monks, is a monk an Arahant? Evil unwholesome states that defile, lead to renewed existence, are fraught with anguish, result in suffering, and are conducive to future birth, aging, and death are far from him. Thus, monks, a monk is an Arahant.

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti.

This the Blessed One said. The monks were pleased and delighted with the Blessed One’s words.

Mahāassapurasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ navamaṃ.

The Greater Discourse at Assapura is finished, the ninth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn39-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA49.8]]; [[MA182]] | M i 271 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA49.8]], [[MA182]], [[SN35.120]], [[SN35.127]], [[SN35.240]], [[AN3.16]], [[AN4.37]], [[DN2]], [[DN3]], [[DN4]], [[DN5]], [[DN6]], [[DN7]], [[DN8]], [[DN9]], [[DN10]], [[DN11]], [[DN12]], [[DN13]], [[MN27]], [[MN38]], [[MN51]], [[MN53]], [[MN60]], [[MN76]], [[MN79]], [[MN94]], [[MN101]], [[MN107]], [[MN112]], [[AN4.14]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN4.198]], [[AN5.76]], [[AN5.140]], [[AN10.99]], [[AN11.17]], [[MN33]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DN2]], [[DHP\|DHPXXVI.AN8.9]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN39]]
> ◄  [[mn38-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn40-deepseek-pali]] ►
