---
sutta_code: "MN68"
sutta_title:
  - "Naḷakapāna Sutta "
  - "At Naḷakapāna"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN68]]
> ◄  [[mn67-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn69-deepseek-pali]] ►

# 68. Naḷakapānasuttaṃ

## 68. The Naḷakapāna Sutta.

166. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā kosalesu viharati naḷakapāne palāsavane. Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā abhiññātā abhiññātā kulaputtā bhagavantaṃ uddissa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā honti – āyasmā ca anuruddho, āyasmā ca bhaddiyo [nandiyo (sī. pī.) vinaye ca ma. ni. 1 cūḷagosiṅge ca], āyasmā ca kimilo [kimbilo (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)], āyasmā ca bhagu, āyasmā ca koṇḍañño [kuṇḍadhāno (sī. pī.)], āyasmā ca revato, āyasmā ca ānando, aññe ca abhiññātā abhiññātā kulaputtā. Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā bhikkhusaṅghaparivuto abbhokāse nisinno hoti. Atha kho bhagavā te kulaputte ārabbha bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘ye te, bhikkhave, kulaputtā mamaṃ uddissa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, kacci te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū abhiratā brahmacariye’’ti? Evaṃ vutte, te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. Dutiyampi kho bhagavā te kulaputte ārabbha bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘ye te, bhikkhave, kulaputtā mamaṃ uddissa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, kacci te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū abhiratā brahmacariye’’ti? Dutiyampi kho te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ. Tatiyampi kho bhagavā te kulaputte ārabbha bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘ye te, bhikkhave, kulaputtā mamaṃ uddissa saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, kacci te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū abhiratā brahmacariye’’ti? Tatiyampi kho te bhikkhū tuṇhī ahesuṃ.

166.Thus have I heard: At one time the Blessed One was dwelling among the Kosalans at Naḷakapāna in the Palāsa Grove. Now at that time several well-known young men from good families had gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith in the Blessed One: Venerable Anuruddha, Venerable Bhaddiya, Venerable Kimbila, Venerable Bhagu, Venerable Koṇḍañña, Venerable Revata, Venerable Ānanda, and other well-known young men from good families. At that time the Blessed One was sitting in the open air surrounded by the Saṅgha of bhikkhus. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus, referring to those young men: “bhikkhus, those young men who have gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith in me—are those bhikkhus delighting in the holy life?” When this was said, the bhikkhus remained silent. A second time the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus, referring to those young men: “bhikkhus, those young men who have gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith in me—are those bhikkhus delighting in the holy life?” A second time the bhikkhus remained silent. A third time the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus, referring to those young men: “bhikkhus, those young men who have gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith in me—are those bhikkhus delighting in the holy life?” A third time the bhikkhus remained silent.

167. Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi – ‘‘yaṃnūnāhaṃ te kulaputte puccheyya’’nti! Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ āmantesi – ‘‘kacci tumhe, anuruddhā, abhiratā brahmacariye’’ti? ‘‘Taggha mayaṃ, bhante, abhiratā brahmacariye’’ti. ‘‘Sādhu sādhu, anuruddhā! Etaṃ kho, anuruddhā, tumhākaṃ patirūpaṃ kulaputtānaṃ saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitānaṃ yaṃ tumhe abhirameyyātha brahmacariye. Yena tumhe anuruddhā, bhadrena yobbanena samannāgatā paṭhamena vayasā susukāḷakesā kāme paribhuñjeyyātha tena tumhe, anuruddhā, bhadrenapi yobbanena samannāgatā paṭhamena vayasā susukāḷakesā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā. Te ca kho pana tumhe, anuruddhā, neva rājābhinītā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, na corābhinītā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, na iṇaṭṭā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, na bhayaṭṭā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā, nājīvikāpakatā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā. Api ca khomhi otiṇṇo jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto; appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethāti – nanu tumhe, anuruddhā, evaṃ saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitā’’ti? ‘‘Evaṃ, bhante’’. ‘‘Evaṃ pabbajitena ca pana, anuruddhā, kulaputtena kimassa karaṇīyaṃ? Vivekaṃ, anuruddhā, kāmehi vivekaṃ akusalehi dhammehi pītisukhaṃ nādhigacchati aññaṃ vā [aññaṃ ca (ka.)] tato santataraṃ, tassa abhijjhāpi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, byāpādopi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, thīnamiddhampi [thīnamiddhampi (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati uddhaccakukkuccampi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, vicikicchāpi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, aratīpi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, tandīpi cittaṃ pariyādāya tiṭṭhati. Vivekaṃ, anuruddhā, kāmehi vivekaṃ akusalehi dhammehi pītisukhaṃ nādhigacchati aññaṃ vā tato santataraṃ’’.

167.Then it occurred to the Blessed One: “Suppose I were to question these clansmen?” Then the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Anuruddha, “Are you delighting, Anuruddhas, in the holy life?” “Certainly, venerable sir, we are delighting in the holy life.” “Good, good, Anuruddhas! It is indeed fitting for you clansmen who have gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith, that you should delight in the holy life. You, Anuruddhas, endowed with the prime of youth, in the bloom of your first years, with perfectly black hair, could enjoy sensual pleasures. Yet you, Anuruddhas, endowed with the prime of youth, in the bloom of your first years, with perfectly black hair, have gone forth from the household life into homelessness. And you, Anuruddhas, did not go forth from the household life into homelessness because you were forced by kings, or forced by thieves, or because of debt, or from fear, or for a livelihood. But rather, ‘I am immersed in birth, aging, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, immersed in suffering, overcome by suffering. Perhaps an end to this entire mass of suffering may be discerned.’ Was it not in this way, Anuruddhas, that you went forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith?” “Yes, venerable sir.” “And what, Anuruddhas, should a clansman who has gone forth do? If, Anuruddhas, one does not attain joy and pleasure born of seclusion, seclusion from sensual pleasures, seclusion from unwholesome qualities, or something even more peaceful than that, then covetousness assails the mind and remains, ill will assails the mind and remains, sloth and torpor assail the mind and remains, restlessness and remorse assail the mind and remains, doubt assails the mind and remains, discontent assails the mind and remains, languor assails the mind and remains. If, Anuruddhas, one does not attain joy and pleasure born of seclusion, seclusion from sensual pleasures, seclusion from unwholesome qualities, or something even more peaceful than that.

‘‘Vivekaṃ, anuruddhā, kāmehi vivekaṃ akusalehi dhammehi pītisukhaṃ adhigacchati aññaṃ vā tato santataraṃ, tassa abhijjhāpi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, byāpādopi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, thīnamiddhampi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, uddhaccakukkuccampi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, vicikicchāpi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, aratīpi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati, tandīpi cittaṃ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhati. Vivekaṃ, anuruddhā, kāmehi vivekaṃ akusalehi dhammehi pītisukhaṃ adhigacchati aññaṃ vā tato santataraṃ.

Seclusion, Anuruddha, from sensual pleasures, seclusion from unwholesome qualities, one attains joy and happiness, or something even more peaceful than that. Covetousness does not assail the mind and remain, ill will does not assail the mind and remain, sloth and torpor do not assail the mind and remain, restlessness and remorse do not assail the mind and remain, doubt does not assail the mind and remain, discontent does not assail the mind and remain, and languor does not assail the mind and remain. Seclusion, Anuruddha, from sensual pleasures, seclusion from unwholesome qualities, one attains joy and happiness, or something even more peaceful than that.

168. ‘‘Kinti vo, anuruddhā, mayi hoti – ‘ye āsavā saṃkilesikā ponobbhavikā [ponobhavikā (sī. pī.)] sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, appahīnā te tathāgatassa; tasmā tathāgato saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodetī’’’ti? ‘‘Na kho no, bhante, bhagavati evaṃ hoti – ‘ye āsavā saṃkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, appahīnā te tathāgatassa; tasmā tathāgato saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodetī’ti. Evaṃ kho no, bhante, bhagavati hoti – ‘ye āsavā saṃkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, pahīnā te tathāgatassa; tasmā tathāgato saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodetī’’’ti. ‘‘Sādhu sādhu, anuruddhā! Tathāgatassa, anuruddhā, ye āsavā saṃkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, pahīnā te ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṃkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā. Seyyathāpi, anuruddhā, tālo matthakacchinno abhabbo punavirūḷhiyā; evameva kho, anuruddhā, tathāgatassa ye āsavā saṃkilesikā ponobbhavikā sadarā dukkhavipākā āyatiṃ jātijarāmaraṇiyā, pahīnā te ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṃkatā āyatiṃ anuppādadhammā; tasmā tathāgato saṅkhāyekaṃ paṭisevati, saṅkhāyekaṃ adhivāseti, saṅkhāyekaṃ parivajjeti, saṅkhāyekaṃ vinodeti’’.

168.What do you think, Anuruddhas: ‘The Tathāgata makes use of some things with discernment, endures some things with discernment, avoids some things with discernment, and dispels some things with discernment because the defiling taints that lead to renewed existence, bring distress, result in suffering, and tend to future birth, aging, and death have not been abandoned by him?’" "No, venerable sir, we don’t think that of the Blessed One. Rather, venerable sir, we think this of the Blessed One: ‘The Tathāgata makes use of some things with discernment, endures some things with discernment, avoids some things with discernment, and dispels some things with discernment because the defiling taints that lead to renewed existence, bring distress, result in suffering, and tend to future birth, aging, and death have been abandoned by him.’" "Good, good, Anuruddhas! The defiling taints that lead to renewed existence, bring distress, result in suffering, and tend to future birth, aging, and death have been abandoned by the Tathāgata, Anuruddhas. They’re cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. Just as a palm tree whose crown is cut off is incapable of further growth, so too, Anuruddhas, the defiling taints that lead to renewed existence, bring distress, result in suffering, and tend to future birth, aging, and death have been abandoned by the Tathāgata. They’re cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. That’s why the Tathāgata makes use of some things with discernment, endures some things with discernment, avoids some things with discernment, and dispels some things with discernment.

‘‘Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, anuruddhā, kaṃ atthavasaṃ sampassamāno tathāgato sāvake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti – ‘asu amutra upapanno; asu amutra upapanno’’’ti? ‘‘Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṃnettikā bhagavaṃpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu vata, bhante, bhagavantaṃyeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī’’ti. ‘‘Na kho, anuruddhā, tathāgato janakuhanatthaṃ na janalapanatthaṃ na lābhasakkārasilokānisaṃsatthaṃ na ‘iti maṃ jano jānātū’ti sāvake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti – ‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno’ti. Santi ca kho, anuruddhā, kulaputtā saddhā uḷāravedā uḷārapāmojjā. Te taṃ sutvā tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharanti. Tesaṃ taṃ, anuruddhā, hoti dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya’’.

What do you think, Anuruddha? Seeing what advantage does the Tathāgata declare to his disciples who have passed away and died, ‘He has been reborn there; he has been reborn there’?" "Venerable sir, our teachings have the Blessed One as their root, the Blessed One as their guide, the Blessed One as their refuge. It would be good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One himself would illuminate the meaning of this statement. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will remember it.""Anuruddha, the Tathāgata does not declare to his disciples who have passed away and died, ‘He has been reborn there; he has been reborn there,’ for the sake of deceiving people, nor for the sake of ingratiating himself with people, nor for the sake of the benefits of gain, honor, and renown, nor with the thought, ‘Let people know me in this way.’ But, Anuruddha, there are clansmen who are faithful, of great joy, of abundant delight. Having heard that, they apply their minds to that purpose. For them, Anuruddha, this will lead to their well-being and happiness for a long time.

169. ‘‘Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhu suṇāti – ‘itthannāmo bhikkhu kālaṅkato [kālakato (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)]; so bhagavatā byākato – aññāya saṇṭhahī’ti. So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā – ‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃpañño so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃvihārī so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuno phāsuvihāro hoti.

169.Here, Anuruddha, a monk hears: ‘The monk named so-and-so has passed away; the Blessed One has declared of him: "He has attained final knowledge and abided."' And that venerable one has been personally seen by him or heard about through report: 'That venerable one was of such virtue, of such qualities, of such wisdom, of such abiding, of such liberation.' Remembering that person's faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to that aim. In this way too, Anuruddha, a monk dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhu suṇāti – ‘itthannāmo bhikkhu kālaṅkato; so bhagavatā byākato – pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā’ti. So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā – ‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo…pe… evaṃpañño… evaṃvihārī… evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuno phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a bhikkhu hears: ‘A certain bhikkhu has died; the Blessed One has declared concerning him: “With the destruction of the five lower fetters, he is reborn spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and will attain final Nibbana there, not liable to return from that world.”’ And that venerable one had been seen by him personally or heard of by report: ‘That venerable one was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.’ Remembering that venerable one’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a bhikkhu dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhu suṇāti – ‘itthannāmo bhikkhu kālaṅkato; so bhagavatā byākato – tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmī sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissatī’ti. So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā – ‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo…pe… evaṃpañño… evaṃvihārī… evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuno phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a bhikkhu hears: ‘A certain bhikkhu has died; the Blessed One has declared concerning him: “With the destruction of the three fetters, and with the attenuation of greed, hatred, and delusion, he is a once-returner, who, having returned to this world only once more, will make an end of suffering.”’ And that venerable one had been seen by him personally or heard of by report: ‘That venerable one was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.’ Remembering that venerable one’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a bhikkhu dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhu suṇāti – ‘itthannāmo bhikkhu kālaṅkato; so bhagavatā byākato – tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’ti. So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā – ‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo…pe… evaṃpañño… evaṃvihārī… evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuno phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a bhikkhu hears: ‘A certain bhikkhu has died; the Blessed One has declared concerning him: “With the destruction of the three fetters, he is a stream-enterer, not liable to fall away, assured of final enlightenment.”’ And that venerable one had been seen by him personally or heard of by report: ‘That venerable one was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.’ Remembering that venerable one’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a bhikkhu dwells at ease.

170. ‘‘Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhunī suṇāti – ‘itthannāmā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; sā bhagavatā byākatā – aññāya saṇṭhahī’ti. Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā – ‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃpaññā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃvihārinī sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuniyā phāsuvihāro hoti.

170.Here, Anuruddha, a bhikkhuni hears: ‘A certain bhikkhuni has died; the Blessed One has declared concerning her: “She has become established in final knowledge.”’ And that sister had been seen by her personally or heard of by report: ‘That sister was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.’ Remembering that sister’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a bhikkhuni dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhunī suṇāti – ‘itthannāmā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; sā bhagavatā byākatā – pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyinī anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā’ti. Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā – ‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā…pe… evaṃpaññā… evaṃvihārinī… evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuniyā phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a bhikkhuni hears: ‘A certain bhikkhuni has died. The Blessed One has declared concerning her, “With the destruction of the five lower fetters, she is reborn spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and will attain final Nibbana there, not liable to return from that world.”’ And that sister had been seen by her personally or heard of by report: ‘That sister was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.’ Remembering that sister’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a bhikkhuni dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhunī suṇāti – ‘itthannāmā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; sā bhagavatā byākatā – tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāminī sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissatī’ti. Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā – ‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā…pe… evaṃpaññā… evaṃvihārinī… evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuniyā phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a bhikkhuni hears: ‘A certain bhikkhuni has died; and the Blessed One has declared concerning her: “With the destruction of the three fetters, with the attenuation of greed, hatred, and delusion, she is a once-returner, who, having returned to this world only once more, will make an end of suffering.”’ And that sister had been seen by her personally or heard of by report: ‘That sister was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.’ Remembering that sister’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a bhikkhuni dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, bhikkhunī suṇāti – ‘itthannāmā bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā; sā bhagavatā byākatā – tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā’ti. Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā – ‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā… evaṃpaññā… evaṃvihārinī… evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, bhikkhuniyā phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a bhikkhuni hears, 'A certain bhikkhuni has died; and the Blessed One has declared concerning her, "With the destruction of the three fetters, she is a stream-enterer, not liable to fall away, assured of final enlightenment."' And that sister had been seen by her personally or heard of by report: 'That sister was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.' Remembering that sister’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a bhikkhuni dwells at ease.

171. ‘‘Idhānuruddhā, upāsako suṇāti – ‘itthannāmo upāsako kālaṅkato; so bhagavatā byākato – pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātiko tattha parinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā’ti. So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā – ‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃpañño so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃvihārī so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. So tassa saddhañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsakassa phāsuvihāro hoti.

171.Here, Anuruddha, a lay follower hears: 'A certain lay follower has died. The Blessed One has declared concerning him: "With the destruction of the five lower fetters, he is reborn spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and will attain final Nibbana there, not liable to return from that world."' And that venerable one had been seen by him personally or heard of by report: 'That venerable one was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.' Remembering that venerable one’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a lay follower dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, upāsako suṇāti – ‘itthannāmo upāsako kālaṅkato; so bhagavatā byākato – tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmī sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissatī’ti. So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā – ‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo… evaṃpañño… evaṃvihārī… evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsakassa phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a lay follower hears: 'A certain lay follower has died. The Blessed One has declared concerning him: "With the destruction of the three fetters, and with the attenuation of greed, hatred, and delusion, he is a once-returner, who, having returned to this world only once more, will make an end of suffering."' And that venerable one had been seen by him personally or heard of by report: 'That venerable one was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.' Remembering that venerable one’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a lay follower dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, upāsako suṇāti – ‘itthannāmo upāsako kālaṅkato; so bhagavatā byākato – tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’ti. So kho panassa āyasmā sāmaṃ diṭṭho vā hoti anussavassuto vā – ‘evaṃsīlo so āyasmā ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammo…pe… evaṃpañño… evaṃvihārī… evaṃvimutto so āyasmā ahosi itipī’ti. So tassa saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussaranto tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā upāsakassa phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a lay follower hears: 'A certain lay follower has died. The Blessed One has declared concerning him: "With the destruction of the three fetters, he is a stream-enterer, not liable to fall away, assured of final enlightenment."' And that venerable one had been seen by him personally or heard of by report: 'That venerable one was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.' Remembering that venerable one’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a lay follower dwells at ease.

172. ‘‘Idhānuruddhā, upāsikā suṇāti – ‘itthannāmā upāsikā kālaṅkatā; sā bhagavatā byākatā – pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyinī anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā’ti. Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā – ‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā… evaṃpaññā… evaṃvihārinī… evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsikāya phāsuvihāro hoti.

172.Here, Anuruddha, a female lay follower hears: ‘A certain female lay follower has died. The Blessed One has declared concerning her: “With the destruction of the five lower fetters, she is reborn spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and will attain final Nibbana there, not liable to return from that world.”’ And that sister had been seen by her personally or heard of by report: ‘That sister was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.’ Remembering that sister’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a female lay follower dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, upāsikā suṇāti – ‘itthannāmā upāsikā kālaṅkatā; sā bhagavatā byākatā – tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāminī sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissatī’ti. Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā – ‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā… evaṃpaññā… evaṃvihārinī… evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsikāya phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a female lay follower hears: ‘A certain female lay follower has died. The Blessed One has declared concerning her: “With the destruction of the three fetters, with the attenuation of greed, hatred, and delusion, she is a once-returner, who, having returned to this world only once more, will make an end of suffering.”’ And that sister had been seen by her personally or heard of by report: ‘That sister was of such virtue, such Dhamma, such wisdom, such dwelling, such liberation.’ Remembering that sister’s faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a female lay follower dwells at ease.

‘‘Idhānuruddhā, upāsikā suṇāti – ‘itthannāmā upāsikā kālaṅkatā; sā bhagavatā byākatā – tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā’ti. Sā kho panassā bhaginī sāmaṃ diṭṭhā vā hoti anussavassutā vā – ‘evaṃsīlā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃdhammā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃpaññā sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃvihārinī sā bhaginī ahosi itipi, evaṃvimuttā sā bhaginī ahosi itipī’ti. Sā tassā saddhañca sīlañca sutañca cāgañca paññañca anussarantī tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharati. Evampi kho, anuruddhā, upāsikāya phāsuvihāro hoti.

Here, Anuruddha, a laywoman hears: 'A laywoman named so-and-so has passed away. The Blessed One has declared of her: "With the destruction of the three fetters, she is a stream-enterer, not subject to falling into the lower states, certain of liberation, bound for full enlightenment."' And that sister was either seen by her personally or heard of by report: 'That sister was of such virtue, such a way of life, such wisdom, such a dwelling, such a liberation.' Remembering her faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she applies her mind to that goal. In this way, Anuruddha, a laywoman dwells at ease.

‘‘Iti kho, anuruddhā, tathāgato na janakuhanatthaṃ na janalapanatthaṃ na lābhasakkārasilokānisaṃsatthaṃ na ‘iti maṃ jano jānātū’ti sāvake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti – ‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno’ti. Santi ca kho, anuruddhā, kulaputtā saddhā uḷāravedā uḷārapāmojjā. Te taṃ sutvā tadatthāya cittaṃ upasaṃharanti. Tesaṃ taṃ, anuruddhā, hoti dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāyā’’ti.

Thus, Anuruddha, the Tathagata does not declare the destinations of disciples who have passed away—saying, 'So-and-so has been reborn there, so-and-so has been reborn there'—for the sake of deceiving people, for the sake of ingratiating himself with people, or for the sake of gain, honor, and praise, nor thinking, 'Let people know me thus.' But there are clansmen who are faithful, of great learning, and of great joy. Hearing this, they apply their minds to that goal. For them, Anuruddha, this will be for their long-term welfare and happiness.

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamano āyasmā anuruddho bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandīti.

This the Blessed One said. Delighted, Venerable Anuruddha rejoiced at the Blessed One's words.

Naḷakapānasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ aṭṭhamaṃ.

The Naḷakapāna Sutta, the eighth, is finished.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:mn68-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA77]] | M i 462 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA77]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN2]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MN]]  / 🌐 [[MN68]]
> ◄  [[mn67-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[mn69-deepseek-pali]] ►
