---
sutta_code: "SN55.63"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.63]]
> ◄  [[sn55.62-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

Verses
SN1-11]] [[sn02#SN02heading|Vol 2:
Causation
SN12-21]] [[sn03#SN03heading|Vol 3:
Aggregates
SN22-34]] [[sn04#SN04heading|Vol 4:
Sense Bases
SN35-44]] [[sn05#SN05heading|Vol 5:
Great Book
SN45-56]]

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### VII. Great Wisdom — SN55.63-74
#### B. Sujato


(63)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to widespread wisdom …”

(64)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to abundant wisdom …”

(65)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to deep wisdom …”

(66)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to extraordinary wisdom …”

(67)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to vast wisdom …”

(68)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to much wisdom …”

(69)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to fast wisdom …”

(70)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to light wisdom …”

(71)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to laughing wisdom …”

(72)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to swift wisdom …”

(73)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to sharp wisdom …”


(74)“bhikkhus, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to penetrating wisdom. What four? Associating with good people, listening to the true teaching, proper attention, and practicing in line with the teaching. When these four things are developed and cultivated they lead to penetrating wisdom.”

(63)“… Puthupaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(64)“… Vipulapaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(65)“… Gambhīrapaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(66)“… Appamattapaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(67)“… Bhūripaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(68)“… Paññābāhullāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(69)“… Sīghapaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(70)“… Lahupaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(71)“… Hāsapaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(72)“… Javanapaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.

(73)“… Tikkhapaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.


(74)“… Nibbedhikapaññatāya saṁvattanti. Katame cattāro? Sappurisasaṁsevo, saddhammassavanaṁ, yonisomanasikāro, dhammānudhammappaṭipatti — ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā nibbedhikapaññatāya saṁvattantī”ti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.63-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.63]]
> ◄  [[sn55.62-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►
