---
sutta_code: "SN55.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Brahmacariyogadhasutta "
  - "Grounded"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.2]]
> ◄  [[sn55.1-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn55.3-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### I. At Bamboo Gate — SN55.2: The Culmination of the Spiritual Life
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

2What four? It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … the teaching … the Saṅgha … And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.


A noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.”

3That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:


4“Those who have faith and ethics,  
confidence, and vision of the truth,  
in time arrive at happiness,  
the culmination of the spiritual life.”

1"Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako sotāpanno hoti avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo.

2Katamehi catūhi? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti: ‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṁ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavā’ti. Dhamme … pe … saṅghe … pe … ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṁvattanikehi.


Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako sotāpanno hoti avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo"ti.

3Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 


4"Yesaṁ saddhā ca sīlañca,  
Pasādo dhammadassanaṁ;  
Te ve kālena paccenti,  
Brahmacariyogadhaṁ sukhan"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA1127]] | S v 343 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA1127]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.8.MN44.]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.2]]
> ◄  [[sn55.1-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn55.3-pali-sc]] ►
