---
sutta_code: "AN11.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Cetanākaranīya "
  - "Volition"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.2]]
> ◄  [[an11.1-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an11.10-thanissaro]] ►

## AN11.2 An Act of Will

## ## Cetanā Sutta


“For a person endowed with virtue, consummate in virtue, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May freedom from remorse arise in me.’ It is in the nature of things that freedom from remorse arises in a person endowed with virtue, consummate in virtue.

“For a person free from remorse, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May joy arise in me.’ It is in the nature of things that joy arises in a person free from remorse.

“For a joyful person, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May rapture arise in me.’ It is in the nature of things that rapture arises in a joyful person.

“For a rapturous person, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May my body be calm.’ It is in the nature of things that a rapturous person grows calm in body.

“For a person calm in body, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May I experience pleasure.’ It is in the nature of things that a person calm in body experiences pleasure.

“For a person experiencing pleasure, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May my mind grow collected.’ It is in the nature of things that the mind of a person experiencing pleasure grows collected.

“For a person whose mind is collected, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May I know & see things as they have come to be.’ It is in the nature of things that a person whose mind is collected knows & sees things as they have come to be.

“For a person who knows & sees things as they have come to be, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May I feel disenchantment.’ It is in the nature of things that a person who knows & sees things as they have come to be feels disenchantment.

“For a person who feels disenchantment, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May I grow dispassionate.’ It is in the nature of things that a person who feels disenchantment grows dispassionate.

“For a dispassionate person, there is no need for an act of will, ‘May I realize the knowledge & vision of release.’ It is in the nature of things that a dispassionate person realizes the knowledge & vision of release.

“In this way, dispassion has knowledge & vision of release as its purpose, knowledge & vision of release as its reward. Disenchantment has dispassion as its purpose, dispassion as its reward. Knowledge & vision of things as they have come to be has disenchantment as its purpose, disenchantment as its reward. samādhi has knowledge & vision of things as they have come to be as its purpose, knowledge & vision of things as they have come to be as its reward. Pleasure has samādhi as its purpose, samādhi as its reward. Calm has pleasure as its purpose, pleasure as its reward. Rapture has calm as its purpose, calm as its reward. Joy has rapture as its purpose, rapture as its reward. Freedom from remorse has joy as its purpose, joy as its reward. Skillful virtues have freedom from remorse as their purpose, freedom from remorse as their reward.

“In this way, mental qualities lead on to mental qualities, mental qualities bring mental qualities to their consummation, for the sake of going from the near to the Further Shore.”

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an11.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA43]] | A v 312 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.2]], [[MA43]], [[SN22.5]], [[SN35.99]], [[SN56.1]], [[PE5]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN5.21]], [[MA54]], [[MA55]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.2]]
> ◄  [[an11.1-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an11.10-thanissaro]] ►
