---
sutta_code: "SN38.16"
sutta_title:
  - "Dukkarapañhāsutta "
  - "Difficult to Do"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN38]]  / 🌐 [[SN38.16]]
> ◄  [[sn38.15-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 38. Jambukhādakasaṁyutta: With Jambukhādaka

### I. With Jambukhādaka — SN38.16: A Question About What’s Hard to Do
#### B. Sujato


1“Reverend Sāriputta, in this teaching and training, what is hard to do?”

“Going forth, reverend, is hard to do in this teaching and training.”

“But what’s hard to do for someone who has gone forth?”

“When you’ve gone forth it’s hard to be satisfied.”

“But what’s hard to do for someone who is satisfied?”

“When you’re satisfied, it’s hard to practice in line with the teaching.”

“But if a bhikkhu practices in line with the teaching, will it take them long to become a perfected one?”

“Not long, reverend.”


1"Kiṁ nu kho, āvuso sāriputta, imasmiṁ dhammavinaye dukkaran"ti?

"Pabbajjā kho, āvuso, imasmiṁ dhammavinaye dukkarā"ti.

"Pabbajitena panāvuso, kiṁ dukkaran"ti?

"Pabbajitena kho, āvuso, abhirati dukkarā"ti.

"Abhiratena panāvuso, kiṁ dukkaran"ti?

"Abhiratena kho, āvuso, dhammānudhammappaṭipatti dukkarā"ti.

"Kīvaciraṁ panāvuso, dhammānudhammappaṭipanno bhikkhu arahaṁ assā"ti?

"Naciraṁ, āvuso"ti.


Soḷasamaṁ.

Jambukhādakasaṁyuttaṁ samattaṁ.

2Nibbānaṁ arahattañca,  
dhammavādī kimatthiyaṁ;  
Assāso paramassāso,  
vedanā āsavāvijjā;  
Taṇhā oghā upādānaṁ,  
bhavo dukkhañca sakkāyo.

Imasmiṁ dhammavinaye dukkaranti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn38.16-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 260 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN38]]  / 🌐 [[SN38.16]]
> ◄  [[sn38.15-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►
