---
sutta_code: "SN12.40"
sutta_title:
  - "Tatiyacetanāsutta "
  - "Volition (3)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.40]]
> ◄  [[sn12.39-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.41-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### IV. Kaḷāra the Aristocrat — SN12.40: Intention (3rd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, what you intend or plan, and what you have underlying tendencies for become a support for the continuation of consciousness. When this support exists, consciousness becomes established. When consciousness is established and grows, there is an inclination. When there is an inclination, there is coming and going. When there is coming and going, there is passing away and reappearing. When there is passing away and reappearing, future rebirth, old age, and death come to be, as do sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

2If you don’t intend or plan, but still have underlying tendencies, this becomes a support for the continuation of consciousness. When this support exists, consciousness becomes established. When consciousness is established and grows, there is an inclination. When there is an inclination, there is coming and going. When there is coming and going, there is passing away and reappearing. When there is passing away and reappearing, future rebirth, old age, and death come to be, as do sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

3If you don’t intend or plan or have underlying tendencies, this doesn’t become a support for the continuation of consciousness. With no support, consciousness is not established. When consciousness is not established and doesn’t grow, there’s no inclination. When there’s no inclination, there’s no coming and going. When there’s no coming and going, there’s no passing away and reappearing. When there’s no passing away and reappearing, future rebirth, old age, and death cease, as do sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Yañca, bhikkhave, ceteti yañca pakappeti yañca anuseti ārammaṇametaṁ hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe sati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa hoti. Tasmiṁ patiṭṭhite viññāṇe virūḷhe nati hoti. Natiyā sati āgatigati hoti. Āgatigatiyā sati cutūpapāto hoti. Cutūpapāte sati āyatiṁ jāti jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

2No ce, bhikkhave, ceteti no ce pakappeti atha ce anuseti, ārammaṇametaṁ hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe sati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa hoti. Tasmiṁ patiṭṭhite viññāṇe virūḷhe nati hoti. Natiyā sati āgatigati hoti. Āgatigatiyā sati cutūpapāto hoti. Cutūpapāte sati āyatiṁ jāti jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

3Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, no ceva ceteti no ca pakappeti no ca anuseti, ārammaṇametaṁ na hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe asati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti. Tadappatiṭṭhite viññāṇe avirūḷhe nati na hoti. Natiyā asati āgatigati na hoti. Āgatigatiyā asati cutūpapāto na hoti. Cutūpapāte asati āyatiṁ jāti jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā nirujjhanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Kaḷārakhattiyavaggo catuttho.

4Bhūtamidaṁ kaḷārañca,  
duve ca ñāṇavatthūni;  
Avijjāpaccayā ca dve,  
natumhā cetanā tayoti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.40-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA361]] | S ii 66 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA361]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.64]], [[SN22.53]], [[SN22.54]], [[SN4:23AND22:87AND12.12]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.40]]
> ◄  [[sn12.39-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.41-sujato-pali]] ►
