---
sutta_code: "SN12.42"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyapañcaverabhayasutta "
  - "Five Fearful Animosities (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.42]]
> ◄  [[sn12.41-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.43-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### V. Householders — SN12.42: Dangers and Threats (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: ‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’

2What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? Killing living creatures … stealing … sexual misconduct … lying … taking alcoholic drinks that cause negligence … These are the five dangers and threats they have quelled.

3What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … the teaching … the Saṅgha … and their ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones. These are the four factors of stream-entry that they have.

4And what is the noble cycle that they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom? A noble disciple carefully and properly attends to dependent origination itself … This is the noble cycle that they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom.

5When a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: ‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti, catūhi ca sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti, ariyo cassa ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho, so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṁ byākareyya: ‘khīṇanirayomhi … pe … avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano’ti.

2Katamāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti? Yaṁ, bhikkhave, pāṇātipātī … pe … yaṁ, bhikkhave, adinnādāyī … yaṁ, bhikkhave, kāmesumicchācārī … yaṁ, bhikkhave, musāvādī … yaṁ, bhikkhave, surāmerayamajjapamādaṭṭhāyī … pe … imāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti.

3Katamehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe … pe … dhamme … saṅghe … ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti. Imehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti.

4Katamo cassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paṭiccasamup pāda ññeva sādhukaṁ yoniso manasi karoti … pe … ayamassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho.

5Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa imāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti, imehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti, ayañcassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho, so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṁ byākareyya: ‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano’"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.42-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S ii 71 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SUTTAISALSOAT55:28ANDATANV182-84.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.42]]
> ◄  [[sn12.41-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.43-sujato-pali]] ►
