---
sutta_code: "SN12.12"
sutta_title:
  - "Moḷiyaphaggunasutta "
  - "Moḷiyaphagguna"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.12]]
> ◄  [[sn12.11-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.13-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### II. Fuel — SN12.12: Phagguna of the Top-Knot
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, there are these four fuels. They maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those that are about to be born. What four? Solid food, whether coarse or fine; contact is the second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the fourth. These are the four fuels that maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those that are about to be born.”

2When he said this, Venerable Phagguna of the Top-Knot said to the Buddha: “But sir, who consumes the fuel for consciousness?”

“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha.

“I don’t speak of one who consumes. If I were to speak of one who consumes, then it would be fitting to ask who consumes. But I don’t speak like that. Hence it would be fitting to ask: ‘Consciousness is a fuel for what?’ And a fitting answer to this would be: ‘Consciousness is a fuel that conditions rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. When that which has been reborn is present, there are the six sense fields. The six sense fields are a condition for contact.’”

2“But sir, who contacts?”

“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha.

“I don’t speak of one who contacts. If I were to speak of one who contacts, then it would be fitting to ask who contacts. But I don’t speak like that. Hence it would be fitting to ask: ‘What is a condition for contact?’ And a fitting answer to this would be: ‘The six sense fields are a condition for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling.’”

4“But sir, who feels?”

“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha.

“I don’t speak of one who feels. If I were to speak of one who feels, then it would be fitting to ask who feels. But I don’t speak like that. Hence it would be fitting to ask: ‘What is a condition for feeling?’ And a fitting answer to this would be: ‘Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving.’”

5“But sir, who craves?”

“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha.

“I don’t speak of one who craves. If I were to speak of one who craves, then it would be fitting to ask who craves. But I don’t speak like that. Hence it would be fitting to ask: ‘What is a condition for craving?’ And a fitting answer to this would be: ‘Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping.’”

6“But sir, who grasps?”

“That’s not a fitting question,” said the Buddha.

“I don’t speak of one who grasps. If I were to speak of one who grasps, then it would be fitting to ask who grasps. But I don’t speak like that. Hence it would be fitting to ask: ‘What is a condition for grasping?’ And a fitting answer to this would be: ‘Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for continued existence.’ … That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

7When the six sense fields fade away and cease with nothing left over, contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Cattārome, bhikkhave, āhārā bhūtānaṁ vā sattānaṁ ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnaṁ vā anuggahāya. Katame cattāro? Kabaḷīkāro āhāro – oḷāriko vā sukhumo vā, phasso dutiyo, manosañcetanā tatiyā, viññāṇaṁ catutthaṁ. Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro āhārā bhūtānaṁ vā sattānaṁ ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnaṁ vā anuggahāyā"ti.

2Evaṁ vutte, āyasmā moḷiyaphagguno bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "ko nu kho, bhante, viññāṇāhāraṁ āhāretī"ti?

"No kallo pañho"ti bhagavā avoca:

"‘āhāretī’ti ahaṁ na vadāmi. ‘Āhāretī’ti cāhaṁ vadeyyaṁ, tatrassa kallo pañho: ‘ko nu kho, bhante, āhāretī’ti? Evañcāhaṁ na vadāmi. Evaṁ maṁ avadantaṁ yo evaṁ puccheyya: ‘kissa nu kho, bhante, viññāṇāhāro’ti, esa kallo pañho. Tatra kallaṁ veyyākaraṇaṁ: ‘viññāṇāhāro āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbattiyā paccayo, tasmiṁ bhūte sati saḷāyatanaṁ, saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso’"ti.

3"Ko nu kho, bhante, phusatī"ti?

"No kallo pañho"ti bhagavā avoca: "‘phusatī’ti ahaṁ na vadāmi.

Phusatī’ti cāhaṁ vadeyyaṁ, tatrassa kallo pañho: ‘ko nu kho, bhante, phusatī’ti? Evañcāhaṁ na vadāmi. Evaṁ maṁ avadantaṁ yo evaṁ puccheyya: ‘kiṁpaccayā nu kho, bhante, phasso’ti, esa kallo pañho. Tatra kallaṁ veyyākaraṇaṁ: ‘saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso, phassapaccayā vedanā’"ti.

4"Ko nu kho, bhante, vedayatī"ti?

"No kallo pañho"ti bhagavā avoca: "‘vedayatī’ti ahaṁ na vadāmi.

‘Vedayatī’ti cāhaṁ vadeyyaṁ, tatrassa kallo pañho: ‘ko nu kho, bhante, vedayatī’ti? Evañcāhaṁ na vadāmi. Evaṁ maṁ avadantaṁ yo evaṁ puccheyya: ‘kiṁpaccayā nu kho, bhante, vedanā’ti, esa kallo pañho. Tatra kallaṁ veyyākaraṇaṁ: ‘phassapaccayā vedanā, vedanāpaccayā taṇhā’"ti.

5"Ko nu kho, bhante, tasatī"ti?

"No kallo pañho"ti bhagavā avoca: "‘tasatī’ti ahaṁ na vadāmi.

‘Tasatī’ti cāhaṁ vadeyyaṁ, tatrassa kallo pañho: ‘ko nu kho, bhante, tasatī’ti? Evañcāhaṁ na vadāmi. Evaṁ maṁ avadantaṁ yo evaṁ puccheyya: ‘kiṁpaccayā nu kho, bhante, taṇhā’ti, esa kallo pañho. Tatra kallaṁ veyyākaraṇaṁ: ‘vedanāpaccayā taṇhā, taṇhāpaccayā upādānan’"ti.

6"Ko nu kho, bhante, upādiyatī"ti?

"No kallo pañho"ti bhagavā avoca: "‘upādiyatī’ti ahaṁ na vadāmi.

‘Upādiyatī’ti cāhaṁ vadeyyaṁ, tatrassa kallo pañho: ‘ko nu kho, bhante, upādiyatī’ti? Evañcāhaṁ na vadāmi. Evaṁ maṁ avadantaṁ yo evaṁ puccheyya: ‘kiṁpaccayā nu kho, bhante, upādānan’ti, esa kallo pañho. Tatra kallaṁ veyyākaraṇaṁ: ‘taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṁ; upādānapaccayā bhavo’ti … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

7Channaṁ tveva, phagguna, phassāyatanānaṁ asesavirāganirodhā phassanirodho; phassanirodhā vedanānirodho; vedanānirodhā taṇhānirodho; taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho; upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho; bhavanirodhā jātinirodho; jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā nirujjhanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA372]] | S ii 12 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA372]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.11]], [[SN12.12]], [[SN12.17]], [[SN12.35]], [[SN12.31]], [[SN12.63]], [[SN12.64]], [[AN10.27]], [[AN]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.12]]
> ◄  [[sn12.11-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.13-sujato-pali]] ►
