---
sutta_code: "SN12.82"
sutta_title:
  - "Antarapeyyāla "
  - "Abbreviated Texts"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.82]]
> ◄  [[sn12.72-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.83-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### IX. Incorporated Abbreviation Series — SN12.82: The Teacher
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, one who does not truly know or see old age and death should seek the Teacher so as to truly know old age and death. One who does not truly know or see the origin of old age and death should seek the Teacher so as to truly know the origin of old age and death. One who does not truly know or see the cessation of old age and death should seek the Teacher so as to truly know the cessation of old age and death. One who does not truly know or see the practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death should seek the Teacher so as to truly know the practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death.”

(All the abbreviated texts should be expanded in full.)

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Jarāmaraṇaṁ, bhikkhave, ajānatā apassatā yathābhūtaṁ jarāmaraṇe yathābhūtaṁ ñāṇāya satthā pariyesitabbo; jarāmaraṇasamudayaṁ ajānatā apassatā yathābhūtaṁ jarāmaraṇasamudaye yathābhūtaṁ ñāṇāya satthā pariyesitabbo; jarāmaraṇanirodhaṁ ajānatā apassatā yathābhūtaṁ jarāmaraṇanirodhe yathābhūtaṁ ñāṇāya satthā pariyesitabbo; jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ ajānatā apassatā yathābhūtaṁ jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya yathābhūtaṁ ñāṇāya satthā pariyesitabbo"ti. (Suttanto eko.) (82.353)

Paṭhamaṁ.

(Sabbesaṁ peyyālo evaṁ vitthāretabbo.)

[[Clean Files 3/Bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN12-21/SN12/SN12.71-80/SN12.72-81#content]][[sn12.83-92#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.82-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.82]]
> ◄  [[sn12.72-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.83-sujato-pali]] ►
