---
sutta_code: "SN12.45"
sutta_title:
  - "Ñātikasutta "
  - "At Ñatika"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.45]]
> ◄  [[sn12.44-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.46-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### V. Householders — SN12.45: At Nādika
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Nādika in the brick house. Then while the Buddha was in private retreat he spoke this exposition of the teaching:

2“Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. … That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

3Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds. … Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells. … Tongue consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and tastes. … Body consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. … Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and thoughts. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. … That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

4Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases with nothing left over, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. … That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

5Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds. … Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and thoughts. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases with nothing left over, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. … That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”


6Now at that time a certain bhikkhu was standing listening in on the Buddha. The Buddha saw him and said: “bhikkhu, did you hear that exposition of the teaching?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Learn that exposition of the teaching, memorize it, and remember it. That exposition of the teaching is beneficial and relates to the fundamentals of the spiritual life.”

#### Pali

1Evaṁ me sutaṁ — ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā ñātike vihārati giñjakāvasathe. Atha kho bhagavā rahogato paṭisallāno imaṁ dhammapariyāyaṁ abhāsi: 

2"Cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṁ. Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā, vedanāpaccayā taṇhā; taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṁ … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

3Sotañca paṭicca sadde ca … pe … ghānañca paṭicca gandhe ca … jivhañca paṭicca rase ca … kāyañca paṭicca phoṭṭhabbe ca … manañca paṭicca dhamme ca uppajjati manoviññāṇaṁ. Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā; vedanāpaccayā taṇhā; taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṁ … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

4Cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṁ. Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā; vedanāpaccayā taṇhā. Tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodhā upādānanirodho; upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti.

5Sotañca paṭicca sadde ca … pe … manañca paṭicca dhamme ca uppajjati manoviññāṇaṁ. Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā; vedanāpaccayā taṇhā. Tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodhā upādānanirodho; upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī"ti.


6Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu bhagavato upassuti ṭhito hoti. Addasā kho bhagavā taṁ bhikkhuṁ upassuti ṭhitaṁ. Disvāna taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca: "assosi no tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ dhammapariyāyan"ti?

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti.

"Uggaṇhāhi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ dhammapariyāyaṁ; pariyāpuṇāhi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ dhammapariyāyaṁ; dhārehi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ dhammapariyāyaṁ. Atthasaṁhito ayaṁ, bhikkhu, dhammapariyāyo ādibrahmacariyako"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.45-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S ii 74 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.113]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.15]], [[SN12.16]], [[SN12.17]], [[SN12.18]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.45]]
> ◄  [[sn12.44-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.46-sujato-pali]] ►
