---
sutta_code: "SN12.64"
sutta_title:
  - "Atthirāgasutta "
  - "If There Is Lust"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.64]]
> ◄  [[sn12.63-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.65-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### VII. The Great Chapter — SN12.64: If There Is Desire
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, there are these four fuels. They maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those that are about to be born. What four? Solid food, whether coarse or fine; contact is the second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the fourth. These are the four fuels that maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those that are about to be born.

2If there is desire, relishing, and craving for solid food, consciousness becomes established there and grows. Where consciousness is established and grows, name and form are conceived. Where name and form are conceived, there is the growth of choices. Where choices grow, there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. Where there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future, there is rebirth, old age, and death in the future. Where there is rebirth, old age, and death in the future, I say this is full of sorrow, anguish, and distress.

3If there is desire, relishing, and craving for contact as fuel … If there is desire, relishing, and craving for mental intention as fuel … If there is desire, relishing, and craving for consciousness as fuel, consciousness becomes established there and grows. Where consciousness is established and grows, name and form are conceived. Where name and form are conceived, there is the growth of choices. Where choices grow, there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. Where there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future, there is rebirth, old age, and death in the future. Where there is rebirth, old age, and death in the future, I say this is full of sorrow, anguish, and distress.

4Suppose an artist or painter had some dye, red lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. And on a polished plank or a wall or a canvas they’d create the image of a woman or a man, complete in all its various parts.

In the same way, if there is desire, relishing, and craving for solid food, consciousness becomes established there and grows. Where consciousness is established and grows, name and form are conceived. Where name and form are conceived, there is the growth of choices. Where choices grow, there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. Where there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future, there is rebirth, old age, and death in the future. Where there is rebirth, old age, and death in the future, I say this is full of sorrow, anguish, and distress.

5If there is desire, relishing, and craving for contact as fuel … If there is desire, relishing, and craving for mental intention as fuel … If there is desire, relishing, and craving for consciousness as fuel, consciousness becomes established there and grows. Where consciousness is established and grows, name and form are conceived. Where name and form are conceived, there is the growth of choices. Where choices grow, there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. Where there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future, there is rebirth, old age, and death in the future. Where there is rebirth, old age, and death in the future, I say this is full of sorrow, anguish, and distress.

6If there is no desire, relishing, and craving for solid food, consciousness does not become established there and doesn’t grow. Where consciousness is not established and doesn’t grow, name and form are not conceived. Where name and form are not conceived, there is no growth of choices. Where choices don’t grow, there is no rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. Where there is no rebirth into a new state of existence in the future, there is no rebirth, old age, and death in the future. Where there is no rebirth, old age, and death in the future, I say there’s no sorrow, anguish, and distress.

7If there is no desire, relishing, and craving for contact as fuel … If there is no desire, relishing, and craving for mental intention as fuel … If there is no desire, relishing, and craving for consciousness as fuel, consciousness doesn’t become established there and doesn’t grow. Where consciousness is not established and doesn’t grow, name and form are not conceived. Where name and form are not conceived, there is no growth of choices. Where choices don’t grow, there is no rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. Where there is no rebirth into a new state of existence in the future, there is no rebirth, old age, and death in the future. Where there is no rebirth, old age, and death in the future, I say there’s no sorrow, anguish, and distress.

8Suppose there was a bungalow or a hall with a peaked roof, with windows on the northern, southern, or eastern side. When the sun rises and a ray of light enters through a window, where would it land?”


“On the western wall, sir.”

“If there were no western wall, where would it land?”

“On the ground, sir.”

“If there were no ground, where would it land?”


“In water, sir.”

“If there were no water, where would it land?”

“It wouldn’t land, sir.”


“In the same way, if there is no desire, relishing, and craving for solid food, consciousness does not become established there and doesn’t grow. …


9If there is no desire, relishing, and craving for contact as fuel … If there is no desire, relishing, and craving for mental intention as fuel … If there is no desire, relishing, and craving for consciousness as fuel, consciousness doesn’t become established there and doesn’t grow. Where consciousness is not established and doesn’t grow, name and form are not conceived. Where name and form are not conceived, there is no growth of choices. Where choices don’t grow, there is no rebirth into a new state of existence in the future. Where there is no rebirth into a new state of existence in the future, there is no rebirth, old age, and death in the future. Where there is no rebirth, old age, and death in the future, I say there’s no sorrow, anguish, and distress.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Cattārome, bhikkhave, āhārā bhūtānaṁ vā sattānaṁ ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnaṁ vā anuggahāya. Katame cattāro? Kabaḷīkāro āhāro oḷāriko vā sukhumo vā, phasso dutiyo, manosañcetanā tatiyā, viññāṇaṁ catutthaṁ. Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro āhārā bhūtānaṁ vā sattānaṁ ṭhitiyā sambhavesīnaṁ vā anuggahāya.

2Kabaḷīkāre ce, bhikkhave, āhāre atthi rāgo atthi nandī atthi taṇhā, patiṭṭhitaṁ tattha viññāṇaṁ virūḷhaṁ. Yattha patiṭṭhitaṁ viññāṇaṁ virūḷhaṁ, atthi tattha nāmarūpassa avakkanti. Yattha atthi nāmarūpassa avakkanti, atthi tattha saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi. Yattha atthi saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi, atthi tattha āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti. Yattha atthi āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti, atthi tattha āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ. Yattha atthi āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ, sasokaṁ taṁ, bhikkhave, sadaraṁ saupāyāsanti vadāmi.

3Phasse ce, bhikkhave, āhāre … pe … manosañcetanāya ce, bhikkhave, āhāre … viññāṇe ce, bhikkhave, āhāre atthi rāgo atthi nandī atthi taṇhā, patiṭṭhitaṁ tattha viññāṇaṁ virūḷhaṁ. Yattha patiṭṭhitaṁ viññāṇaṁ virūḷhaṁ, atthi tattha nāmarūpassa avakkanti. Yattha atthi nāmarūpassa avakkanti, atthi tattha saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi. Yattha atthi saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi, atthi tattha āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti. Yattha atthi āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti, atthi tattha āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ. Yattha atthi āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ, sasokaṁ taṁ, bhikkhave, sadaraṁ saupāyāsanti vadāmi.

4Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rajako vā cittakārako vā sati rajanāya vā lākhāya vā haliddiyā vā nīliyā vā mañjiṭṭhāya vā suparimaṭṭhe vā phalake bhittiyā vā dussapaṭṭe vā itthirūpaṁ vā purisarūpaṁ vā abhinimmineyya sabbaṅgapaccaṅgaṁ;

evameva kho, bhikkhave, kabaḷīkāre ce āhāre atthi rāgo atthi nandī atthi taṇhā, patiṭṭhitaṁ tattha viññāṇaṁ virūḷhaṁ. Yattha patiṭṭhitaṁ viññāṇaṁ virūḷhaṁ, atthi tattha nāmarūpassa avakkanti. Yattha atthi nāmarūpassa avakkanti, atthi tattha saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi. Yattha atthi saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi, atthi tattha āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti. Yattha atthi āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti, atthi tattha āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ. Yattha atthi āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ, sasokaṁ taṁ, bhikkhave, sadaraṁ saupāyāsanti vadāmi.

5Phasse ce, bhikkhave, āhāre … pe … manosañcetanāya ce, bhikkhave, āhāre … viññāṇe ce, bhikkhave, āhāre atthi rāgo atthi nandī atthi taṇhā, patiṭṭhitaṁ tattha viññāṇaṁ virūḷhaṁ. Yattha patiṭṭhitaṁ viññāṇaṁ virūḷhaṁ, atthi tattha nāmarūpassa avakkanti. Yattha atthi nāmarūpassa avakkanti, atthi tattha saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi. Yattha atthi saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi, atthi tattha āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti. Yattha atthi āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti, atthi tattha āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ. Yattha atthi āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ, sasokaṁ taṁ, bhikkhave, sadaraṁ saupāyāsanti vadāmi.

6Kabaḷīkāre ce, bhikkhave, āhāre natthi rāgo natthi nandī natthi taṇhā, appatiṭṭhitaṁ tattha viññāṇaṁ avirūḷhaṁ. Yattha appatiṭṭhitaṁ viññāṇaṁ avirūḷhaṁ, natthi tattha nāmarūpassa avakkanti. Yattha natthi nāmarūpassa avakkanti, natthi tattha saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi. Yattha natthi saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi, natthi tattha āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti. Yattha natthi āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti, natthi tattha āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ. Yattha natthi āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ, asokaṁ taṁ, bhikkhave, adaraṁ anupāyāsanti vadāmi.

7Phasse ce, bhikkhave, āhāre … pe … manosañcetanāya ce, bhikkhave, āhāre … viññāṇe ce, bhikkhave, āhāre natthi rāgo natthi nandī natthi taṇhā, appatiṭṭhitaṁ tattha viññāṇaṁ avirūḷhaṁ. Yattha appatiṭṭhitaṁ viññāṇaṁ avirūḷhaṁ, natthi tattha nāmarūpassa avakkanti. Yattha natthi nāmarūpassa avakkanti, natthi tattha saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi. Yattha natthi saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi, natthi tattha āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti. Yattha natthi āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti, natthi tattha āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ. Yattha natthi āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ, asokaṁ taṁ, bhikkhave, adaraṁ anupāyāsanti vadāmi.

8Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kūṭāgāraṁ vā kūṭāgārasālaṁ vā uttarāya vā dakkhiṇāya vā pācīnāya vā vātapānā sūriye uggacchante vātapānena rasmi pavisitvā kvāssa patiṭṭhitā"ti?


"Pacchimāyaṁ, bhante, bhittiyan"ti.

"Pacchimā ce, bhikkhave, bhitti nāssa kvāssa patiṭṭhitā"ti?

"Pathaviyaṁ, bhante"ti.

"Pathavī ce, bhikkhave, nāssa kvāssa patiṭṭhitā"ti?


"Āpasmiṁ, bhante"ti.

"Āpo ce, bhikkhave, nāssa kvāssa patiṭṭhitā"ti?

"Appatiṭṭhitā, bhante"ti.


"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, kabaḷīkāre ce āhāre natthi rāgo natthi nandī natthi taṇhā … pe … .


9Phasse ce, bhikkhave, āhāre … manosañcetanāya ce, bhikkhave, āhāre … viññāṇe ce, bhikkhave, āhāre natthi rāgo natthi nandī natthi taṇhā, appatiṭṭhitaṁ tattha viññāṇaṁ avirūḷhaṁ. Yattha appatiṭṭhitaṁ viññāṇaṁ avirūḷhaṁ, natthi tattha nāmarūpassa avakkanti. Yattha natthi nāmarūpassa avakkanti, natthi tattha saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi. Yattha natthi saṅkhārānaṁ vuddhi, natthi tattha āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti. Yattha natthi āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti, natthi tattha āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ. Yattha natthi āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇaṁ asokaṁ taṁ, bhikkhave, adaraṁ anupāyāsanti vadāmī"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.64-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA374-378]] | S ii 101 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA374-378]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.11]], [[SN12.12]], [[AN12.25]], [[SN12.31]], [[SN1212.38]], [[SN1212.39]], [[SN12.63]], [[AN10.27]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.64]]
> ◄  [[sn12.63-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.65-sujato-pali]] ►
