---
sutta_code: "SN12.39"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyacetanāsutta "
  - "Volition (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.39]]
> ◄  [[sn12.38-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.40-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### IV. Kaḷāra the Aristocrat — SN12.39: Intention (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, what you intend or plan, and what you have underlying tendencies for become a support for the continuation of consciousness. When this support exists, consciousness becomes established. When consciousness is established, name and form are conceived. Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. … craving … grasping … continued existence … rebirth … old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress come to be. That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

2If you don’t intend or plan, but still have underlying tendencies, this becomes a support for the continuation of consciousness. When this support exists, consciousness becomes established. When consciousness is established, name and form are conceived. Name and form are conditions for the six sense fields. … That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

3If you don’t intend or plan or have underlying tendencies, this doesn’t become a support for the continuation of consciousness. With no support, consciousness is not established. When consciousness is not established, name and form are not conceived. When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. … That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Yañca, bhikkhave, ceteti yañca pakappeti yañca anuseti, ārammaṇametaṁ hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe sati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa hoti. Tasmiṁ patiṭṭhite viññāṇe virūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti. Nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṁ; saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso; phassapaccayā vedanā … pe … taṇhā … upādānaṁ … bhavo … jāti … jarāmaraṇaṁ … sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

2No ce, bhikkhave, ceteti no ce pakappeti, atha ce anuseti, ārammaṇametaṁ hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe sati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa hoti. Tasmiṁ patiṭṭhite viññāṇe virūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti. Nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṁ … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

3Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, no ceva ceteti no ca pakappeti no ca anuseti, ārammaṇametaṁ na hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe asati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti. Tadappatiṭṭhite viññāṇe avirūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti na hoti. Nāmarūpanirodhā saḷāyatananirodho … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.39-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA360]] | S ii 66 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA360]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.64]], [[SN22.53]], [[SN22.54]], [[SN4:23AND22:87AND12.12]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.39]]
> ◄  [[sn12.38-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.40-sujato-pali]] ►
