---
sutta_code: "SN12.56"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyamahārukkhasutta "
  - "The Great Tree (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.56]]
> ◄  [[sn12.55-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.57-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### VI. Suffering — SN12.56: A Great Tree (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose there was a great tree. And its roots going downwards and across all draw the sap upwards. Fueled and sustained by that, the great tree would stand for a long time.

In the same way, there are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. Craving is a condition for grasping. … That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.


2Suppose there was a great tree. Then a person comes along with a spade and basket. They’d cut the tree down at the roots, dig them up, and pull them out, down to the fibers and stems. They’d cut the tree apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into little bits. They’d dry the bits in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to ashes. Then they’d winnow the ashes in a strong wind, or float them away down a swift stream. In this way the great tree is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

In the same way, there are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. … That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahārukkho. Tassa yāni ceva mūlāni adhogamāni, yāni ca tiriyaṅgamāni, sabbāni tāni uddhaṁ ojaṁ abhiharanti. Evañhi so, bhikkhave, mahārukkho tadāhāro tadupādāno ciraṁ dīghamaddhānaṁ tiṭṭheyya.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, upādāniyesu dhammesu assādānupassino vihārato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṁ … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.


2Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahārukkho. Atha puriso āgaccheyya kuddālapiṭakaṁ ādāya. So taṁ rukkhaṁ mūle chindeyya, mūle chetvā palikhaṇeyya, palikhaṇitvā mūlāni uddhareyya … pe … nadiyā vā sīghasotāya pavāheyya. Evañhi so, bhikkhave, mahārukkho ucchinnamūlo assa tālāvatthukato anabhāvaṅkato āyatiṁ anup pāda dhammo.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, upādāniyesu dhammesu ādīnavānupassino vihārato taṇhā nirujjhati. Taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.56-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA284]] | S ii 88 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA284]], [[SN12.58]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.120]], [[AN35.109]], [[AN122]], [[AN12.39]], [[AN12.64]], [[AN]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.56]]
> ◄  [[sn12.55-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.57-sujato-pali]] ►
