---
sutta_code: "SN12.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭipadāsutta "
  - "The Two Ways"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.3]]
> ◄  [[sn12.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### I. The Buddhas — SN12.3: Practice
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the wrong practice and the right practice. Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.”

“Yes, sir,” they replied. The Buddha said this:

2“And what’s the wrong practice? Ignorance is a condition for choices.

Choices are a condition for consciousness. … That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. This is called the wrong practice.

3And what’s the right practice? When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. This is called the right practice.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati

… pe … "micchāpaṭipadāñca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi sammāpaṭipadāñca. Taṁ suṇātha, sādhukaṁ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etadavoca: 

2"Katamā ca, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipadā? Avijjāpaccayā, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā;

saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṁ … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, micchāpaṭipadā.

3Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipadā? Avijjāya tveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho; saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sammāpaṭipadā"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S ii 4 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.5.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.3]]
> ◄  [[sn12.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.4-sujato-pali]] ►
