---
sutta_code: "SN12.54"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyasaṁyojanasutta "
  - "Fetters (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.54]]
> ◄  [[sn12.53-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.55-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 12. Nidānasaṁyutta: On Causation

### VI. Suffering — SN12.54: Fetters (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. And from time to time someone would pour oil in and adjust the wick. Fueled and sustained by that, the oil lamp would burn for a long time.

In the same way, there are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows. Craving is a condition for grasping. … That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

2Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. And no-one would pour oil in and adjust the wick from time to time. As the original fuel is used up and no more is added, the oil lamp would be extinguished due to lack of fuel.

In the same way, there are things that are prone to being fettered. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. … That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, telañca paṭicca vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyeyya. Tatra puriso kālena kālaṁ telaṁ āsiñceyya vaṭṭiṁ upasaṁhareyya. Evañhi so, bhikkhave, telappadīpo tadāhāro tadupādāno ciraṁ dīghamaddhānaṁ jaleyya.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyesu dhammesu assādānupassino vihārato taṇhā pavaḍḍhati. Taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṁ … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

2Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, telañca paṭicca vaṭṭiñca paṭicca telappadīpo jhāyeyya. Tatra puriso na kālena kālaṁ telaṁ āsiñceyya na vaṭṭiṁ upasaṁhareyya. Evañhi so, bhikkhave, telappadīpo purimassa ca upādānassa pariyādānā aññassa ca anupahārā anāhāro nibbāyeyya.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyesu dhammesu ādīnavānupassino vihārato taṇhā nirujjhati. Taṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.54-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA285]] | S ii 87 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA285]], [[SN12.10]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.120]], [[AN35.109]], [[AN122]], [[AN12.39]], [[AN12.64]], [[AN]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.54]]
> ◄  [[sn12.53-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.55-sujato-pali]] ►
