---
sutta_code: "SN38.10"
sutta_title:
  - "Taṇhāpañhāsutta "
  - "Craving"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN38]]  / 🌐 [[SN38.10]]
> ◄  [[sn38.9-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn38.11-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 38.10 Taṇhāpañhāsuttaṃ

## SN 38.10 The Question on Craving

323. ‘‘‘Taṇhā, taṇhā’ti, āvuso sāriputta, vuccati. Katamā nu kho, āvuso, taṇhā’’ti? ‘‘Tisso imā, āvuso, taṇhā. Kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā – imā kho, āvuso, tisso taṇhā’’ti. ‘‘Atthi panāvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā, etāsaṃ taṇhānaṃ pahānāyā’’ti? ‘‘Atthi kho, āvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā, etāsaṃ taṇhānaṃ pahānāyā’’ti. ‘‘Katamo panāvuso, maggo katamā paṭipadā, etāsaṃ taṇhānaṃ pahānāyā’’ti? ‘‘Ayameva kho, āvuso, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, etāsaṃ taṇhānaṃ pahānāya, seyyathidaṃ – sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā sammākammanto sammāājīvo sammāvāyāmo sammāsati sammāsamādhi. Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā, etāsaṃ taṇhānaṃ pahānāyā’’ti. ‘‘Bhaddako, āvuso, maggo bhaddikā paṭipadā, etāsaṃ taṇhānaṃ pahānāya. Alañca panāvuso sāriputta, appamādāyā’’ti. Dasamaṃ.

323.“‘Craving, craving,’ friend Sāriputta, it is said. But what, friend, is craving?” “There are, friend, these three cravings: sensual craving, craving for existence, craving for non-existence. These, friend, are the three cravings.” “But is there, friend, a path, is there a practice for the abandoning of these cravings?” “There is, friend, a path, there is a practice for the abandoning of these cravings.” “And what, friend, is that path, what is that practice for the abandoning of these cravings?” “It is just this Noble Eightfold Path, friend, for the abandoning of these cravings, namely: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right samādhi. This, friend, is the path, this is the practice for the abandoning of these cravings.” “Excellent, friend, is the path, excellent is the practice for the abandoning of these cravings. And it is quite sufficient, friend Sāriputta, for heedfulness.” The tenth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn38.10-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 257 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN38]]  / 🌐 [[SN38.10]]
> ◄  [[sn38.9-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn38.11-deepseek-pali]] ►
