---
sutta_code: "SN38.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Assāsappattasutta "
  - "Conslation"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN38]]  / 🌐 [[SN38.5]]
> ◄  [[sn38.4-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn38.6-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 38.5 Assāsappattasuttaṃ

## SN 38.5 The Discourse on Attaining Comfort

318. ‘‘‘Assāsappatto, assāsappatto’ti, āvuso sāriputta, vuccati. Kittāvatā nu kho, āvuso, assāsappatto hotī’’ti? ‘‘Yato kho, āvuso, bhikkhu channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ettāvatā kho, āvuso, assāsappatto hotī’’ti. ‘‘Atthi panāvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā, etassa assāsassa sacchikiriyāyā’’ti? ‘‘Atthi kho, āvuso, maggo atthi paṭipadā, etassa assāsassa sacchikiriyāyā’’ti. ‘‘Katamo panāvuso, maggo katamā paṭipadā, etassa assāsassa sacchikiriyāyā’’ti? ‘‘Ayameva kho, āvuso, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo etassa assāsassa sacchikiriyāya, seyyathidaṃ – sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā sammākammanto sammāājīvo sammāvāyāmo sammāsati sammāsamādhi. Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, maggo ayaṃ paṭipadā, etassa assāsassa sacchikiriyāyā’’ti. ‘‘Bhaddako, āvuso, maggo bhaddikā paṭipadā, etassa assāsassa sacchikiriyāya. Alañca panāvuso sāriputta, appamādāyā’’ti. Pañcamaṃ.

318."‘One who has attained comfort, one who has attained comfort,’ friend Sāriputta, is said. But to what extent, friend, is one who has attained comfort?" "When, friend, a bhikkhu truly understands the arising and passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape regarding the six sense bases, to that extent, friend, is one who has attained comfort." "But, friend, is there a path, is there a practice, for the realization of this comfort?" "There is, friend, a path, there is a practice, for the realization of this comfort." "What, friend, is the path, what is the practice, for the realization of this comfort?" "This very Noble Eightfold Path, friend, is for the realization of this comfort, namely: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right samādhi. This, friend, is the path, this is the practice, for the realization of this comfort." "Excellent, friend, is the path, excellent is the practice, for the realization of this comfort. And it is enough, friend Sāriputta, for heedfulness." The fifth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn38.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 254 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN38]]  / 🌐 [[SN38.5]]
> ◄  [[sn38.4-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn38.6-deepseek-pali]] ►
