---
sutta_code: "SN55.51"
sutta_title:
  - "Sagāthakasutta "
  - "With Verses"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.51]]
> ◄  [[sn55.50-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.52-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### VI. A Wise Person — SN55.51: With Verses
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

2What four? It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … the teaching … the Saṅgha … And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.

A noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.”

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:


3“Whoever has faith in the Realized One,  
unwavering and well grounded;  
whose ethical conduct is good,  
praised and loved by the noble ones;

4who has confidence in the Saṅgha,  
and correct view:  
they’re said to be prosperous,  
their life is not in vain.

5So let the wise devote themselves  
to faith, ethical behaviour,  
confidence, and insight into the teaching,  
remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.”

1"Catūhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako sotāpanno hoti avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo.

2Katamehi catūhi? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti – itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavāti. Dhamme … pe … saṅghe … pe … ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṁvattanikehi.

Imehi kho, bhikkhave, catūhi dhammehi samannāgato ariyasāvako sotāpanno hoti avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo"ti.

Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 


3"Yassa saddhā tathāgate,  
acalā suppatiṭṭhitā;  
Sīlañca yassa kalyāṇaṁ,  
ariyakantaṁ pasaṁsitaṁ.

4Saṅghe pasādo yassatthi,  
ujubhūtañca dassanaṁ;  
Adaliddoti taṁ āhu,  
amoghaṁ tassa jīvitaṁ.

5Tasmā saddhāñca sīlañca,  
pasādaṁ dhammadassanaṁ;  
Anuyuñjetha medhāvī,  
saraṁ buddhānasāsanan"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.51-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 404 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.51]]
> ◄  [[sn55.50-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.52-sujato-pali]] ►
