---
sutta_code: "SN55.13"
sutta_title:
  - "Ānandattherasutta "
  - "Ānanda"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.13]]
> ◄  [[sn55.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.14-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### II. A Thousand Nuns — SN55.13: With the Senior bhikkhu Ānanda
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the venerables Ānanda and Sāriputta were staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to him:

“Reverend, how many things do people have to give up and how many do they have to possess in order for the Buddha to declare that they’re a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening?”


“Reverend, people have to give up four things and possess four things in order for the Buddha to declare that they’re a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.


2What four?

They don’t have the distrust in the Buddha that causes an uneducated ordinary person to be reborn — when their body breaks up, after death — in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And they do have the experiential confidence in the Buddha that causes an educated noble disciple to be reborn — when their body breaks up, after death — in a good place, a heavenly realm. ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

3They don’t have the distrust in the teaching that causes an uneducated ordinary person to be reborn — when their body breaks up, after death — in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And they do have the experiential confidence in the teaching that causes an educated noble disciple to be reborn — when their body breaks up, after death — in a good place, a heavenly realm. ‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha — visible in this very life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’

4They don’t have the distrust in the Saṅgha that causes an uneducated ordinary person to be reborn — when their body breaks up, after death — in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And they do have the experiential confidence in the Saṅgha that causes an educated noble disciple to be reborn — when their body breaks up, after death — in a good place, a heavenly realm. ‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, straightforward, methodical, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, and worthy of veneration with joined palms.’

5They don’t have the unethical conduct that causes an uneducated ordinary person to be reborn — when their body breaks up, after death — in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And they do have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones that causes an educated noble disciple to be reborn — when their body breaks up, after death — in a good place, a heavenly realm. Their ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

People have to give up these four things and possess these four things in order for the Buddha to declare that they’re a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ āyasmā ca ānando āyasmā ca sāriputto sāvatthiyaṁ vihāranti jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāyanhasamayaṁ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṁ sammodi. Sammodanīyaṁ kathaṁ sāraṇīyaṁ vītisāretvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṁ Ānandaṁ etadavoca:

"Katinaṁ kho, āvuso Ānanda, dhammānaṁ pahānā, katinaṁ dhammānaṁ samannāgamanahetu, evamayaṁ pajā bhagavatā byākatā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā"ti?


"Catunnaṁ kho, āvuso, dhammānaṁ pahānā, catunnaṁ dhammānaṁ samannāgamanahetu, evamayaṁ pajā bhagavatā byākatā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇāti.


2Katamesaṁ catunnaṁ?

Yathārūpena kho, āvuso, buddhe appasādena samannāgato assutavā puthujjano kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjati tathārūpassa buddhe appasādo na hoti. Yathārūpena ca kho, āvuso, buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato sutavā ariyasāvako kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjati tathārūpassa buddhe aveccappasādo hoti – itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavāti.

3Yathārūpena ca kho, āvuso, dhamme appasādena samannāgato assutavā puthujjano kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjati tathārūpassa dhamme appasādo na hoti. Yathārūpena ca kho, āvuso, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato sutavā ariyasāvako kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjati tathārūpassa dhamme aveccappasādo hoti – svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo … pe … viññūhīti.

4Yathārūpena ca kho, āvuso, saṅghe appasādena samannāgato assutavā puthujjano kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjati tathārūpassa saṅghe appasādo na hoti. Yathārūpena ca kho, āvuso, saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgato sutavā ariyasāvako kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjati tathārūpassa saṅghe aveccappasādo hoti – suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho … pe … anuttaraṁ puññakkhettaṁ lokassāti.

5Yathārūpena ca kho, āvuso, dussīlyena samannāgato assutavā puthujjano kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjati tathārūpassa dussīlyaṁ na hoti. Yathārūpehi ca kho, āvuso, ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato sutavā ariyasāvako kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjati tathārūpāni ariyakantāni sīlāni honti akhaṇḍāni … pe … samādhisaṁvattanikāni.

Imesaṁ kho, āvuso, catunnaṁ dhammānaṁ pahānā imesaṁ catunnaṁ dhammānaṁ samannāgamanahetu evamayaṁ pajā bhagavatā byākatā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.13-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 362 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.13]]
> ◄  [[sn55.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.14-sujato-pali]] ►
