---
sutta_code: "SN55.29"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyabhayaverūpasantasutta "
  - "Fearful Animosities (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.29]]
> ◄  [[sn55.28-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.30-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### III. About About Sarakāni — SN55.29: Dangers and Threats (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī. … “bhikkhus, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: ‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ … pe … "yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa imāni pañca bhayāni verāni vūpasantāni honti, imehi catūhi sotāpattiyaṅgehi samannāgato hoti, ayañcassa ariyo ñāyo paññāya sudiṭṭho hoti suppaṭividdho; so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṁ byākareyya: ‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto; sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.29-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA845]] | S v 389 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN9.28]], [[SA845]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.29]]
> ◄  [[sn55.28-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.30-sujato-pali]] ►
