---
sutta_code: "SN55.33"
sutta_title:
  - "Tatiyapuññābhisandasutta "
  - "Streams of Merit (3)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.33]]
> ◄  [[sn55.32-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.34-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### IV. Overflowing Merit — SN55.33: Overflowing Merit (3rd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1-2“bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. What four? It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha … the teaching … the Saṅgha …


3Furthermore, a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness.

These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness.”

1"Cattārome, bhikkhave, puññābhisandā kusalābhisandā sukhassāhārā. Katame cattāro? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti – itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavāti. Ayaṁ paṭhamo puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro.

2Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako dhamme … pe … saṅghe … pe … .


3Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā. Ayaṁ catuttho puññābhisando kusalābhisando sukhassāhāro.

Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro puññābhisandā kusalābhisandā sukhassāhārā"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.33-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 392 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.33]]
> ◄  [[sn55.32-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.34-sujato-pali]] ►
