---
sutta_code: "SN55.16"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamamittāmaccasutta "
  - "Friends and Colleagues (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.16]]
> ◄  [[sn55.15-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.17-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### II. A Thousand Nuns — SN55.16: Friends and Colleagues (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in the four factors of stream-entry.

What four? Experiential confidence in the Buddha … the teaching … the Saṅgha … And the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.

Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in these four factors of stream-entry.”

1"Ye te, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṁ maññeyyuṁ – mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā – te, bhikkhave, catūsu sotāpattiyaṅgesu samādapetabbā, nivesetabbā, patiṭṭhāpetabbā.

Katamesu catūsu? Buddhe aveccappasāde samādapetabbā, nivesetabbā, patiṭṭhāpetabbā – itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavāti. Dhamme … pe … saṅghe … pe … ariyakantesu sīlesu samādapetabbā, nivesetabbā, patiṭṭhāpetabbā akhaṇḍesu … pe … samādhisaṁvattanikesu.

Ye te, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṁ maññeyyuṁ – mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā – te, bhikkhave, imesu catūsu sotāpattiyaṅgesu samādapetabbā, nivesetabbā, patiṭṭhāpetabbā"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.16-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA836]] | S v 364 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA836]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.16]]
> ◄  [[sn55.15-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.17-sujato-pali]] ►
