---
sutta_code: "SN55.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyagiñjakāvasathasutta "
  - "The Brick Hall (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.9]]
> ◄  [[sn55.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.10-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### I. At Bamboo Gate — SN55.9: At the Brick Hall (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Ānanda said to the Buddha:

“Sir, the bhikkhu named Asoka has passed away. Where has he been reborn in his next life? The nun named Asokā, the layman named Asoka, and the laywoman named Asokā have passed away. Where have they been reborn in the next life?”

2“Ānanda, the bhikkhu Asoka passed away having realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life …

(And all is explained as in SN55.8)


3This is that mirror of the teaching. A noble disciple who has this may declare of themselves: ‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’”

1Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"asoko nāma, bhante, bhikkhu kālaṅkato; tassa kā gati, ko abhisamparāyo? Asokā nāma, bhante, bhikkhunī kālaṅkatā … pe … asoko nāma, bhante, upāsako kālaṅkato … pe … asokā nāma, bhante, upāsikā kālaṅkatā; tassā kā gati, ko abhisamparāyo"ti?

2"Asoko, ānanda, bhikkhu kālaṅkato āsavānaṁ khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi … pe … (purimaveyyākaraṇena ekanidānaṁ.)


3Ayaṁ kho so, ānanda, dhammādāso dhammapariyāyo; yena samannāgato ariyasāvako ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṁ byākareyya: ‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA851]] | S v 358 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA851]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.9]]
> ◄  [[sn55.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.10-sujato-pali]] ►
