---
sutta_code: "SN55.35"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyadevapadasutta "
  - "Divine Tracks (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.35]]
> ◄  [[sn55.34-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.36-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 55. Sotāpattisaṁyutta: On Stream-Entry

### IV. Overflowing Merit — SN55.35: Footprints of the Gods (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, these four footprints of the gods are in order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings.

2What four? Firstly, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ Then they reflect: ‘What now is the footprint of the gods?’ They understand: ‘I hear that these days the gods consider non-harming to be supreme. But I don’t hurt any creature firm or frail. I definitely live in possession of a footprint of the gods.’ This is the first footprint of the gods in order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings.


3Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the teaching … the Saṅgha …


4Furthermore, a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. Then they reflect: ‘What now is the footprint of the gods?’ They understand: ‘I hear that these days the gods consider non-harming to be supreme. But I don’t hurt any creature firm or frail. I definitely live in possession of a footprint of the gods.’ This is the fourth footprint of the gods in order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings.

These four footprints of the gods are in order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings.”

1"Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, devānaṁ devapadāni avisuddhānaṁ sattānaṁ visuddhiyā apariyodātānaṁ sattānaṁ pariyodapanāya.

2Katamāni cattāri? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgato hoti – itipi so bhagavā … pe … satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavāti. So iti paṭisañcikkhati: ‘kiṁ nu kho devānaṁ devapadan’ti? So evaṁ pajānāti: ‘abyābajjhaparame khvāhaṁ etarahi deve suṇāmi. Na ca kho panāhaṁ kiñci byābādhemi tasaṁ vā thāvaraṁ vā. Addhāhaṁ devapadadhammasamannāgato viharāmī’ti. Idaṁ paṭhamaṁ devānaṁ devapadaṁ avisuddhānaṁ sattānaṁ visuddhiyā apariyodātānaṁ sattānaṁ pariyodapanāya.


3Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako dhamme … pe … saṅghe … pe … .


4Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgato hoti akhaṇḍehi … pe … samādhisaṁvattanikehi. So iti paṭisañcikkhati: ‘kiṁ nu kho devānaṁ devapadan’ti? So evaṁ pajānāti: ‘abyābajjhaparame khvāhaṁ etarahi deve suṇāmi. Na kho panāhaṁ kiñci byābādhemi tasaṁ vā thāvaraṁ vā. Addhāhaṁ devapadadhammasamannāgato viharāmī’ti. Idaṁ catutthaṁ devānaṁ devapadaṁ avisuddhānaṁ sattānaṁ visuddhiyā apariyodātānaṁ sattānaṁ pariyodapanāya.

Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri devānaṁ devapadāni avisuddhānaṁ sattānaṁ visuddhiyā apariyodātānaṁ sattānaṁ pariyodapanāyā"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.35-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA848-850]] | S v 393 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA848-850]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.35]]
> ◄  [[sn55.34-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn55.36-sujato-pali]] ►
