---
sutta_code: "SN48.46"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyapubbārāmasutta "
  - "The Eastern Park (2)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.46]]
> ◄  [[sn48.45-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.47-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 48.46 Dutiyapubbārāmasuttaṃ

## SN 48.46 The Second Discourse at the Eastern Park

516. Taṃyeva nidānaṃ. ‘‘Katinaṃ nu kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṃ byākaroti – ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī’’ti? Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā…pe… ‘‘dvinnaṃ kho, bhikkhave, indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṃ byākaroti – ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmīti. Katamesaṃ dvinnaṃ? Ariyāya ca paññāya, ariyāya ca vimuttiyā. Yā hissa, bhikkhave, ariyā paññā tadassa paññindriyaṃ. Yā hissa, bhikkhave, ariyā vimutti tadassa samādhindriyaṃ. Imesaṃ kho, bhikkhave, dvinnaṃ indriyānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā khīṇāsavo bhikkhu aññaṃ byākaroti – ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānāmī’’ti. Chaṭṭhaṃ.

516.The same setting. “Monks, through the development and cultivation of how many faculties does a monk whose taints are destroyed declare final knowledge: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being’?” “Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One…” “Monks, it is through the development and cultivation of two faculties that a monk whose taints are destroyed declares final knowledge: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’ Which two? Noble wisdom and noble freedom. For him, monks, noble wisdom is the faculty of wisdom. For him, monks, noble freedom is the faculty of samādhi. It is through the development and cultivation of these two faculties that a monk whose taints are destroyed declares final knowledge: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’” The sixth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.46-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 222 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.46]]
> ◄  [[sn48.45-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.47-deepseek-pali]] ►
