---
sutta_code: "SN48.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyasotāpannasutta "
  - "Stream-Enterer (2)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.3]]
> ◄  [[sn48.2-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.4-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 48.3 Dutiyasotāpannasuttaṃ

## SN 48.3 The Second Stream-Enterer Discourse

473. ‘‘Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṃ, vīriyindriyaṃ, satindriyaṃ, samādhindriyaṃ, paññindriyaṃ. Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako imesaṃ pañcannaṃ indriyānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’’ti. Tatiyaṃ.

473.“Bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. Which five? The faculty of faith, the faculty of energy, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of samādhi, and the faculty of wisdom. When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple understands as it actually is the origination and passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to these five faculties, he is called, bhikkhus, a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, not subject to falling away, assured, destined for enlightenment.” The Third.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA644]] | S v 193 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA644]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.3]]
> ◄  [[sn48.2-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.4-deepseek-pali]] ►
