---
sutta_code: "SN48.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamasotāpannasutta "
  - "Stream-Enterer (1)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.2]]
> ◄  [[sn48.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.3-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 48.2 Paṭhamasotāpannasuttaṃ

## SN 48.2 The First Stream-Enterer Discourse

472. ‘‘Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṃ, vīriyindriyaṃ, satindriyaṃ, samādhindriyaṃ, paññindriyaṃ. Yato kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako imesaṃ pañcannaṃ indriyānaṃ assādañca [samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca (syā. kaṃ. pī. ka.) saṃ. ni. 2.175] ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’’ti. Dutiyaṃ.

472.“Bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. Which five? The faculty of faith, the faculty of energy, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of samādhi, and the faculty of wisdom. When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple understands as it actually is the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to these five faculties, he is called, bhikkhus, a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, not subject to falling away, assured, destined for enlightenment.” The Second.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA644]] | S v 193 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA644]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.2]]
> ◄  [[sn48.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn48.3-deepseek-pali]] ►
