---
sutta_code: "MA19"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "尼乾 "
  - "to the Nigaṇṭhas"
nikaya:
  - "MA "
  - "Madhyama Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "MA11-20"
  - ""
  - "MA 2 Karma"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Doctrines"
  - "Kamma"
  - "Practices"
sutta_topic:
  - "Views right and wrong"
  - "Kamma disolve"
  - "Effort right"
sutta_training:
  - "Sīla"
  - "Samādhi"
  - "Paññā"
sutta_stage:
  - "Intro"
  - "Beginning"
  - "Middle"
  - "End"
  - "Final"
sutta_method:
  - "Lecture"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Doctrinal"
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - "High"
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Buddha"
sutta_audience:
  - "Bhikkhus"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: ""
parallels_partilal: "[[SN2.27]], [[JA509]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA18]]  🌐 [[MA20]] ►

# MA19 - 尼乾 - to the Nigaṇṭhas
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> The Buddha  tackles a group of jain ascetics, pressing them on their claim to be practicing to end all suffering by self-mortification. He points out a series of fallacies in their logic, and explains his own middle way
The Buddha  refutes a jain theory of kamma, which claims that one's present experience is determined solely by one's actions in past lives, and that the effects of past unskillful actions can be "burned away" through austerity practices. The Buddha  here outlines one of his most important teachings on kamma: that it is both the results of past deeds and present actions that shape one's experience of the present. It is precisely this interaction of present and past that opens up the very possibility of awakening

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> I did not see any legitimate defense of their doctrine from the jains so deserve rebuke and criticism on ten legitimate grounds. That’s How exertion and striving is fruitless.
Action whose result is to be experienced as happiness, suffering, or made mature that action cannot, through striving and through
asceticism, be turned otherwise 
And how is exertion and striving fruitful? It’s When a bhikkhu doesn’t bring suffering upon themselves; and they don’t give up legitimate pleasure, but they’re not besotted with that pleasure
> 
> These five things can be seen to turn out in two different ways. Faith, preference, oral tradition, reasoned contemplation, and acceptance of a view after consideration
Strong asceticism results strong pain, middle striving results middle pain, weak asceticism results weak pain
 they give up these five hindrances, enter in 4 jhanas, knowledge of ending of taints,  their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.
> 

> [!info] Similes
> Man struck by an arrow at each step, the treatment was painful, but is healthy now
Man in love with a woman give up that desire and lus
Arrowsmith was heating an arrow shaft between two firebrands, making it straight and fit for use.

---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN2.27]], [[JA509]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!example]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN3.61]], [[AN3.99]], [[MA13]], [[SN35.145]], [[SN36.21]], [[SN42.11]], [[SN42.8]]

> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA19%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BMA19%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA19%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BMA19%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Ama19-%20-file%3A%22MA18%22%20-file%3A%22MA20%22%20-file%3A%22MA19%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/ma19/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[MA]] | ◄  [[MA18]]  🌐 [[MA20]] ►
