---
sutta_code: "SN56.37"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamasūriyasutta "
  - "The Sun (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.37]]
> ◄  [[sn56.36-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.38-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### IV. In a Rosewood Forest — SN56.37: The Simile of the Sun (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise.

In the same way, right view is the forerunner and precursor of truly comprehending the four noble truths. A bhikkhu with right view can expect to truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.

2That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Sūriyassa, bhikkhave, udayato etaṁ pubbaṅgamaṁ etaṁ pubbanimittaṁ, yadidaṁ – aruṇuggaṁ.

Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno catunnaṁ ariyasaccānaṁ yathābhūtaṁ abhisamayāya etaṁ pubbaṅgamaṁ etaṁ pubbanimittaṁ, yadidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi. Tassetaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṁ: ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānissati … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānissati.

2Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.37-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA394]] | S v 442 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA394]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.37]]
> ◄  [[sn56.36-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.38-sujato-pali]] ►
