---
sutta_code: "SN56.131"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.131]]
> ◄  [[sn56.129-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### XI. Abbreviated Texts on Five Destinations — SN56.131: Dying as Ghosts and Reborn as Ghosts
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“… the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as gods are few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in the ghost realm are many. Why is that? It’s because they haven’t seen the four noble truths. What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

2That’s why you should practice meditation to understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.”


That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the bhikkhus were happy with what the Buddha said.


1 … "Evameva kho, bhikkhave, appakā te sattā ye pettivisayā cutā devesu paccājāyanti; atha kho eteva bahutarā sattā ye pettivisayā cutā pettivisaye paccājāyanti. Taṁ kissa hetu? Adiṭṭhattā, bhikkhave, catunnaṁ ariyasaccānaṁ. Katamesaṁ catunnaṁ? Dukkhassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhasamudayassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhanirodhassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ariyasaccassa.

2Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhasamudayo’ti yogo karaṇīyo, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodho’ti yogo karaṇīyo, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.


3Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṁ abhinandunti.


Tiṁsatimaṁ.

Pañcagatipeyyālavaggo ekādasamo.

4Manussato cutā chāpi,  
devā cutā nirayato;  
Tiracchānapettivisayā,  
tiṁsamatto gativaggoti.

Saccasaṁyuttaṁ dvādasamaṁ.

Mahāvaggo pañcamo.

5Maggabojjhaṅgaṁ satiyā,  
indriyaṁ sammappadhānaṁ;  
Baliddhipādānuruddhā,  
jhānānāpānasaṁyutaṁ;  
Sotāpatti saccañcāti,  
mahāvaggoti vuccatīti.

Mahāvaggasaṁyuttapāḷi niṭṭhitā.

Saṁyuttanikāyo samatto.

[[sn56.129-130#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.131-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.131]]
> ◄  [[sn56.129-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
