---
sutta_code: "SN56.23"
sutta_title:
  - "Sammāsambuddhasutta "
  - "The Perfectly Enlightened One"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.23]]
> ◄  [[sn56.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.24-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### III. At the Village of Koṭi — SN56.23: The Fully Awakened Buddha
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, there are these four noble truths. What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. These are the four noble truths. It is because he has truly woken up to these four noble truths that the Realized One is called ‘the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha’.

2That’s why you should practice meditation …”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, ariyasaccāni. Katamāni cattāri? Dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṁ – imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri ariyasaccāni. Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṁ ariyasaccānaṁ yathābhūtaṁ abhisambuddhattā tathāgato ‘arahaṁ sammāsambuddho’ti vuccati.

2Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA402]] | S v 433 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA402]], [[SN56.24]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.23]]
> ◄  [[sn56.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.24-sujato-pali]] ►
