---
sutta_code: "SN56.30"
sutta_title:
  - "Gavampatisutta "
  - "Gavampati"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.30]]
> ◄  [[sn56.29-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.31-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### III. At the Village of Koṭi — SN56.30: With Gavampati
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time several bhikkhus were staying in the land of the Cetis at Sahajāti. Now at that time, after the meal, on return from alms-round, several senior bhikkhus sat together in the pavilion and this discussion came up among them:

“Reverends, does someone who sees suffering also see the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering?”

2When they said this, Venerable Gavampati said to those senior bhikkhus:

“Reverends, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: ‘Someone who sees suffering also sees the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. Someone who sees the origin of suffering also sees suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. Someone who sees the cessation of suffering also sees suffering, the origin of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. Someone who sees the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering also sees suffering, the origin of suffering, and the cessation of suffering.’”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ sambahulā therā bhikkhū cetesu vihāranti sahañcanike. Tena kho pana samayena sambahulānaṁ therānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pacchābhattaṁ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantānaṁ maṇḍalamāḷe sannisinnānaṁ sannipatitānaṁ ayamantarākathā udapādi:

"yo nu kho, āvuso, dukkhaṁ passati dukkhasamudayampi so passati, dukkhanirodhampi passati, dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāmpi passatī"ti.

2Evaṁ vutte, āyasmā gavampati thero bhikkhū etadavoca:

"sammukhā metaṁ, āvuso, bhagavato sutaṁ, sammukhā paṭiggahitaṁ: ‘yo, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ passati dukkhasamudayampi so passati, dukkhanirodhampi passati, dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāmpi passati. Yo dukkhasamudayaṁ passati dukkhampi so passati, dukkhanirodhampi passati, dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāmpi passati. Yo dukkhanirodhaṁ passati dukkhampi so passati, dukkhasamudayampi passati, dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāmpi passati. Yo dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ passati dukkhampi so passati, dukkhasamudayampi passati, dukkhanirodhampi passatī’"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Koṭigāmavaggo tatiyo.

3Dve vajjī sammāsambuddho,  
arahaṁ āsavakkhayo;  
Mittaṁ tathā ca loko ca,  
pariññeyyaṁ gavampatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.30-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 436 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.30]]
> ◄  [[sn56.29-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.31-sujato-pali]] ►
