---
sutta_code: "SN56.51"
sutta_title:
  - "Nakhasikhāsutta "
  - "The Fingernail"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.51]]
> ◄  [[sn56.50-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.52-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### VI. Comprehension — SN56.51: A Fingernail
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Then the Buddha, picking up a little bit of dirt under his fingernail, addressed the bhikkhus:

“What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the little bit of dirt under my fingernail, or this great earth?”

“Sir, the great earth is certainly more. The little bit of dirt under your fingernail is tiny. Compared to the great earth, it can’t be reckoned or compared, it’s not even a fraction.”

“In the same way, for a person with comprehension, a noble disciple accomplished in view, the suffering that’s over and done with is more, what’s left is tiny. Compared to the mass of suffering in the past that’s over and done with, it can’t be reckoned or compared, it’s not even a fraction, since there are at most seven more lives. Such a person truly understands about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.


2That’s why you should practice meditation …”

#### Pali

1Atha kho bhagavā parittaṁ nakhasikhāyaṁ paṁsuṁ āropetvā bhikkhū āmantesi:

"taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ – yo vāyaṁ mayā paritto nakhasikhāyaṁ paṁsu āropito, ayaṁ vā mahāpathavī"ti?

"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ yadidaṁ – mahāpathavī; appamattakāyaṁ bhagavatā paritto nakhasikhāyaṁ paṁsu āropito. Saṅkhampi na upeti, upanidhampi na upeti, kalabhāgampi na upeti mahāpathaviṁ upanidhāya bhagavatā paritto nakhasikhāyaṁ paṁsu āropito"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa diṭṭhisampannassa puggalassa abhisametāvino etadeva bahutaraṁ dukkhaṁ yadidaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādinnaṁ; appamattakaṁ avasiṭṭhaṁ. Saṅkhampi na upeti, upanidhampi na upeti, kalabhāgampi na upeti purimaṁ dukkhakkhandhaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādinnaṁ upanidhāya yadidaṁ sattakkhattuparamatā; yo ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti.


2Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.51-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA442]] | S v 459 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA442]], [[SN13.1]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN56:51-60AREPARALLELTO13:1-10]], [[AN]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.51]]
> ◄  [[sn56.50-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.52-sujato-pali]] ►
