---
sutta_code: "SN56.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Viggāhikakathāsutta "
  - "Disputatious Talk"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.9]]
> ◄  [[sn56.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.10-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### I. Immersion — SN56.9: Arguments
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, don’t get into arguments, such as: ‘You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this — if you can!’ Why is that? Because those discussions aren’t beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. They don’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

2When you discuss, you should discuss: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. … That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Mā, bhikkhave, viggāhikakathaṁ katheyyātha: ‘Na tvaṁ imaṁ dhammavinayaṁ ājānāsi, ahaṁ imaṁ dhammavinayaṁ ājānāmi. Kiṁ tvaṁ imaṁ dhammavinayaṁ ājānissasi. Micchāpaṭipanno tvamasi, ahamasmi sammāpaṭipanno. Sahitaṁ me, asahitaṁ te. Purevacanīyaṁ pacchā avaca, pacchāvacanīyaṁ pure avaca. Adhiciṇṇaṁ te viparāvattaṁ. Āropito te vādo, cara vādappamokkhāya. Niggahitosi, nibbeṭhehi vā sace pahosī’ti. Taṁ kissa hetu? Nesā, bhikkhave, kathā atthasaṁhitā nādibrahmacariyakā na nibbidāya na virāgāya na nirodhāya na upasamāya na abhiññāya na sambodhāya na nibbānāya saṁvattati.

2Kathentā ca kho tumhe, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti katheyyātha, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhasamudayo’ti katheyyātha, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodho’ti katheyyātha, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti katheyyātha … pe … yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA412]] | S v 419 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA412]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.9]]
> ◄  [[sn56.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.10-sujato-pali]] ►
