---
sutta_code: "SN56.26"
sutta_title:
  - "Mittasutta "
  - "Friends"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.26]]
> ◄  [[sn56.25-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.27-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### III. At the Village of Koṭi — SN56.26: Friends
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in the true comprehension of the four noble truths.

2What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in the true comprehension of these four noble truths.


3That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṁ maññeyyuṁ – mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā – te vo, bhikkhave, catunnaṁ ariyasaccānaṁ yathābhūtaṁ abhisamayāya samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā.

2Katamesaṁ catunnaṁ? Dukkhassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhasamudayassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhanirodhassa ariyasaccassa, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ariyasaccassa.

Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, anukampeyyātha, ye ca sotabbaṁ maññeyyuṁ – mittā vā amaccā vā ñātī vā sālohitā vā – te vo, bhikkhave, imesaṁ catunnaṁ ariyasaccānaṁ yathābhūtaṁ abhisamayāya samādapetabbā nivesetabbā patiṭṭhāpetabbā.


3Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.26-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 435 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.26]]
> ◄  [[sn56.25-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.27-sujato-pali]] ►
