---
sutta_code: "SN56.44"
sutta_title:
  - "Kūṭāgārasutta "
  - "Peaked House"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.44]]
> ◄  [[sn56.43-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.45-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### V. A Cliff — SN56.44: A Bungalow
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, suppose someone were to say: ‘Without truly comprehending the noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I will completely make an end of suffering.’ That is not possible.

2It’s as if someone were to say: ‘Before the lower story of a bungalow is built, I will climb up to the upper story.’ That is not possible. In the same way, suppose someone were to say: ‘Without truly comprehending the noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I will completely make an end of suffering.’ That is not possible.

3But suppose someone were to say: ‘After truly comprehending the noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I will completely make an end of suffering.’ That is possible.

4It’s as if someone were to say: ‘After the lower story of a bungalow is built, I will climb up to the upper story.’ That is possible. In the same way, suppose someone were to say: ‘After truly comprehending the noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I will completely make an end of suffering.’ That is possible.


5That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Yo hi, bhikkhave, evaṁ vadeyya: ‘Ahaṁ dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ yathābhūtaṁ anabhisamecca … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ ariyasaccaṁ yathābhūtaṁ anabhisamecca sammā dukkhassantaṁ karissāmī’ti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.

2Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yo evaṁ vadeyya: ‘Ahaṁ kūṭāgārassa heṭṭhimaṁ gharaṁ akaritvā uparimaṁ gharaṁ āropessāmī’ti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, yo evaṁ vadeyya: ‘Ahaṁ dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ yathābhūtaṁ anabhisamecca … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ ariyasaccaṁ yathābhūtaṁ anabhisamecca sammā dukkhassantaṁ karissāmī’ti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.

3Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, evaṁ vadeyya: ‘Ahaṁ dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ yathābhūtaṁ abhisamecca … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ ariyasaccaṁ yathābhūtaṁ abhisamecca sammā dukkhassantaṁ karissāmī’ti – ṭhānametaṁ vijjati.

4Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yo evaṁ vadeyya: ‘Ahaṁ kūṭāgārassa heṭṭhimaṁ gharaṁ karitvā uparimaṁ gharaṁ āropessāmī’ti – ṭhānametaṁ vijjati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, yo evaṁ vadeyya: ‘Ahaṁ dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ yathābhūtaṁ abhisamecca … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ ariyasaccaṁ yathābhūtaṁ abhisamecca sammā dukkhassantaṁ karissāmī’ti – ṭhānametaṁ vijjati.


5Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.44-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA436-437]] | S v 452 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA436-437]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.44]]
> ◄  [[sn56.43-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.45-sujato-pali]] ►
