---
sutta_code: "SN56.18"
sutta_title:
  - "Vijjāsutta "
  - "True Knowledge"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.18]]
> ◄  [[sn56.17-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.19-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### II. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma — SN56.18: Knowledge
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘knowledge’. What is knowledge? And how is a knowledgeable person defined?”


“Knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is defined.


2That’s why you should practice meditation …”

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"‘vijjā, vijjā’ti, bhante, vuccati. Katamā nu kho, bhante, vijjā; kittāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī"ti?


"Yaṁ kho, bhikkhu, dukkhe ñāṇaṁ, dukkhasamudaye ñāṇaṁ, dukkhanirodhe ñāṇaṁ, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṁ – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhu, vijjā; ettāvatā ca vijjāgato hotīti.


2Tasmātiha, bhikkhu, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 429 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN141]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.18]]
> ◄  [[sn56.17-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.19-sujato-pali]] ►
