---
sutta_code: "SN56.21"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamakoṭigāmasutta "
  - "Koṭigama (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.21]]
> ◄  [[sn56.20-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.22-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### III. At the Village of Koṭi — SN56.21: At the Village of Koṭi (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at the village of Koṭi. There the Buddha addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus, not understanding and not penetrating four noble truths, both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very long time.


2What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

These noble truths of suffering, origin, cessation, and the path have been understood and comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the attachment to continued existence is ended; now there are no more future lives.”

3That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:


4“Because of not truly seeing  
the four noble truths,  
we have transmigrated for a long time  
from one rebirth to the next.

5But now that these truths have been seen,  
the attachment to rebirth is eradicated.  
The root of suffering is cut off,  
now there are no more future lives.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā vajjīsu vihārati koṭigāme. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: "catunnaṁ, bhikkhave, ariyasaccānaṁ ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṁ dīghamaddhānaṁ sandhāvitaṁ saṁsaritaṁ mamañceva tumhākañca.


2Katamesaṁ catunnaṁ? Dukkhassa, bhikkhave, ariyasaccassa ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṁ dīghamaddhānaṁ sandhāvitaṁ saṁsaritaṁ mamañceva tumhākañca. Dukkhasamudayassa ariyasaccassa … pe … dukkhanirodhassa ariyasaccassa … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ariyasaccassa ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṁ dīghamaddhānaṁ sandhāvitaṁ saṁsaritaṁ mamañceva tumhākañca.

Tayidaṁ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ anubuddhaṁ paṭividdhaṁ, dukkhasamudayaṁ ariyasaccaṁ anubuddhaṁ paṭividdhaṁ, dukkhanirodhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ anubuddhaṁ paṭividdhaṁ, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṁ anubuddhaṁ paṭividdhaṁ; ucchinnā bhavataṇhā, khīṇā bhavanetti; natthi dāni punabbhavo"ti.

3Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 


4"Catunnaṁ ariyasaccānaṁ,  
Yathābhūtaṁ adassanā;  
Saṁsitaṁ dīghamaddhānaṁ,  
Tāsu tāsveva jātisu.

5Tāni etāni diṭṭhāni,  
bhavanetti samūhatā;  
Ucchinnaṁ mūlaṁ dukkhassa,  
natthi dāni punabbhavo"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.21-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA25.1]], [[SA403]] | S v 431 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA25.1]], [[SA403]], [[DN16]], [[PLI-TV-KD6]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.21]]
> ◄  [[sn56.20-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.22-sujato-pali]] ►
