---
sutta_code: "SN56.57"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamamahāsamuddasutta "
  - "The Ocean (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.57]]
> ◄  [[sn56.56-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.58-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### VI. Comprehension — SN56.57: The Ocean (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, suppose a man was to draw up two or three drops of water from the ocean.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the two or three drops drawn out or the water in the ocean?”

“Sir, the water in the ocean is certainly more. The two or three drops drawn out are tiny. Compared to the water in the ocean, it can’t be reckoned or compared, it’s not even a fraction.”

“In the same way, for a noble disciple … That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso mahāsamuddato dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni uddharitāni.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ – yāni dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni ubbhatāni, yaṁ vā mahāsamudde udakan"ti?

"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ, yadidaṁ – mahāsamudde udakaṁ; appamattakāni dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni ubbhatāni. Saṅkhampi na upenti, upanidhampi na upenti, kalabhāgampi na upenti mahāsamudde udakaṁ upanidhāya dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni ubbhatānī"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa … pe … yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.57-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA440]] | S v 463 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN56.52-53]], [[SA440]], [[SN13.7]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN56:51-60AREPARALLELTO13:1-10]], [[AN]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.57]]
> ◄  [[sn56.56-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.58-sujato-pali]] ►
