---
sutta_code: "SN56.13"
sutta_title:
  - "Khandhasutta "
  - "Aggregates"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.13]]
> ◄  [[sn56.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.14-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### II. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma — SN56.13: Aggregates
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are these four noble truths. What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

2And what is the noble truth of suffering? You should say: ‘The five grasping aggregates’. That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is called the noble truth of suffering.

3And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? It’s the craving that leads to future rebirth, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure in various different realms. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

4And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not adhering to it. This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

5And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

These are the four noble truths.


6That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Cattārimāni, bhikkhave, ariyasaccāni. Katamāni cattāri? Dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ, dukkhasamudayaṁ ariyasaccaṁ, dukkhanirodhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṁ.

2Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ? ‘Pañcupādānakkhandhā’ tissa vacanīyaṁ, seyyathidaṁ – rūpupādānakkhandho … pe … viññāṇupādānakkhandho. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ.

3Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhasamudayaṁ ariyasaccaṁ? Yāyaṁ taṇhā ponobbhavikā nandirāgasahagatā tatratatrābhinandinī, seyyathidaṁ – kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhasamudayaṁ ariyasaccaṁ.

4Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ? Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodho cāgo paṭinissaggo mutti anālayo – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhaṁ ariyasaccaṁ.

5Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṁ? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccaṁ.

Imāni kho, bhikkhave, cattāri ariyasaccāni.


6Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.13-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 425 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN141]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.13]]
> ◄  [[sn56.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.14-sujato-pali]] ►
