---
sutta_code: "SN56.19"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṅkāsanasutta "
  - "Implications"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.19]]
> ◄  [[sn56.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.20-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### II. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma — SN56.19: Expressions
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, I’ve declared: ‘This is the noble truth of suffering.’ And there are limitless explanations, phrases, and expressions about that:

‘This is another way of saying that this is the noble truth of suffering.’ I’ve declared: ‘This is the noble truth of the origin of suffering.’ … I’ve declared: ‘This is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.’ … I’ve declared: ‘This is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’ And there are limitless explanations, phrases, and expressions about that: ‘This is another way of saying that this is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’


2That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"‘Idaṁ dukkhaṁ ariyasaccan’ti, bhikkhave, mayā paññattaṁ. Tattha aparimāṇā vaṇṇā aparimāṇā byañjanā aparimāṇā saṅkāsanā:

‘Itipidaṁ dukkhaṁ ariyasaccan’ti; idaṁ dukkhasamudayaṁ … pe … idaṁ dukkhanirodhaṁ … pe … ‘idaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccan’ti, bhikkhave, mayā paññattaṁ. Tattha aparimāṇā vaṇṇā aparimāṇā byañjanā aparimāṇā saṅkāsanā: ‘itipidaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā ariyasaccan’ti.


2Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 430 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.19]]
> ◄  [[sn56.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn56.20-sujato-pali]] ►
