---
sutta_code: "SN52.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Ambapālivanasutta "
  - "All, or Ambapali's Grove"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN52]]  / 🌐 [[SN52.9]]
> ◄  [[sn52.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn52.10-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 52. Anuruddhasaṁyutta: With Anuruddha

### I. In Private — SN52.9: In Ambapālī’s Mango Grove
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the venerables Anuruddha and Sāriputta were staying near Vesālī, in Ambapālī’s Wood. Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Anuruddha, and said to him:

“Reverend Anuruddha, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright. What kind of meditation are you usually practicing these days?”

2“These days, reverend, I usually meditate with my mind firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I meditate observing an aspect of the body … feelings … mind … principles — keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. These days I usually meditate with my mind firmly established in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

A bhikkhu who is perfected — with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment — usually meditates with their mind firmly established in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.”

“We’re so fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate, to have heard such a dramatic statement in the presence of Venerable Anuruddha.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ āyasmā ca anuruddho āyasmā ca sāriputto vesāliyaṁ vihāranti ambapālivane. Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto sāyanhasamayaṁ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā sāriputto āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ etadavoca: 

2"Vippasannāni kho te, āvuso anuruddha, indriyāni, parisuddho mukhavaṇṇo pariyodāto. Katamenāyasmā anuruddho vihārena etarahi bahulaṁ vihāratī"ti?

"Catūsu khvāhaṁ, āvuso, satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto etarahi bahulaṁ viharāmi. Katamesu catūsu? Idhāhaṁ, āvuso, kāye kāyānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṁ; vedanāsu … pe … citte … pe … dhammesu dhammānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṁ – imesu khvāhaṁ, āvuso, catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto etarahi bahulaṁ viharāmi.

Yo so, āvuso, bhikkhu arahaṁ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṁyojano sammadaññāvimutto, so imesu catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto bahulaṁ vihāratī"ti.

3"Lābhā vata no, āvuso, suladdhaṁ vata no, āvuso. Ye mayaṁ āyasmato anuruddhassa sammukhāva assumha āsabhiṁ vācaṁ bhāsamānassā"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn52.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 301 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN52]]  / 🌐 [[SN52.9]]
> ◄  [[sn52.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn52.10-sujato-pali]] ►
