---
sutta_code: "SN52.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Sutanusutta "
  - "Sutanu"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN52]]  / 🌐 [[SN52.3]]
> ◄  [[sn52.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn52.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 52. Anuruddhasaṁyutta: With Anuruddha

### I. In Private — SN52.3: On the Bank of the Sutanu
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī on the bank of the Sutanu. Then several bhikkhus went up to Venerable Anuruddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to him:

“What things has Venerable Anuruddha developed and cultivated to attain great direct knowledge?”


2“Reverends, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I meditate observing an aspect of the body — keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world.

I meditate observing an aspect of feelings … mind … principles — keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. I attained great direct knowledge by developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And it was by developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that I directly knew the lower realm as lower, the middle realm as middle, and the higher realm as higher.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ āyasmā anuruddho sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati sutanutīre. Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yenāyasmā anuruddho tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā anuruddhena saddhiṁ sammodiṁsu. Sammodanīyaṁ kathaṁ sāraṇīyaṁ vītisāretvā ekamantaṁ nisīdiṁsu. Ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ anuruddhaṁ etadavocuṁ:

"Katamesaṁ āyasmā anuruddho dhammānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā mahābhiññataṁ patto"ti?


2"Catunnaṁ khvāhaṁ, āvuso, satipaṭṭhānānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā mahābhiññataṁ patto. Katamesaṁ catunnaṁ? Idhāhaṁ, āvuso, kāye kāyānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṁ;

Vedanāsu … pe … citte … pe … dhammesu dhammānupassī viharāmi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṁ – imesaṁ khvāhaṁ, āvuso, catunnaṁ satipaṭṭhānānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā mahābhiññataṁ patto.

Imesañca panāhaṁ, āvuso, catunnaṁ satipaṭṭhānānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā hīnaṁ dhammaṁ hīnato abbhaññāsiṁ, majjhimaṁ dhammaṁ majjhimato abbhaññāsiṁ, paṇītaṁ dhammaṁ paṇītato abbhaññāsin"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn52.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 297 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN52]]  / 🌐 [[SN52.3]]
> ◄  [[sn52.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn52.4-sujato-pali]] ►
