---
sutta_code: "SN29.7"
sutta_title:
  - "Sutasutta "
  - "They’ve Heard"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN29]]  / 🌐 [[SN29.7]]
> ◄  [[sn29.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn29.8-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 29. Nāgasaṁyutta: On Dragons

### I. Dragons — SN29.7: They’ve Heard
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons?”

“2bhikkhu, it’s when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. And they’ve heard: ‘The egg-born dragons are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ They think: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons!’ When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons.

This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti?

2"Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena dvayakārī hoti, vācāya dvayakārī hoti, manasā dvayakārī hoti. Tassa sutaṁ hoti: ‘aṇḍajā nāgā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. Tassa evaṁ hoti: ‘aho vatāhaṁ kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyyan’ti. So kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjati.

Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn29.7-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 243 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN29]]  / 🌐 [[SN29.7]]
> ◄  [[sn29.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn29.8-sujato-pali]] ►
