---
sutta_code: "SN29.11"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN29.11]]
> ◄  [[sn29.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn29.21-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 29. Nāgasaṁyutta: On Dragons

### I. Dragons — SN29.11-20: Ten Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become Egg-Born
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Seated to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons?”

2“bhikkhu, it’s when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. And they’ve heard: ‘The egg-born dragons are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ They think: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons!’ They give food … drink … clothing … a vehicle … a garland … fragrance … makeup … a bed … a house … a lamp. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons.

This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons.”

#### Pali

1Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti?

2"Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena dvayakārī hoti, vācāya dvayakārī, manasā dvayakārī. Tassa sutaṁ hoti: ‘aṇḍajā nāgā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. Tassa evaṁ hoti: ‘aho vatāhaṁ kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyyan’ti. So annaṁ deti. So kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjati. Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu … pe … upapajjatīti … pe … so pānaṁ deti … pe … vatthaṁ deti … pe … yānaṁ deti … pe … mālaṁ deti … pe … gandhaṁ deti … pe … vilepanaṁ deti … pe … seyyaṁ deti … pe … āvasathaṁ deti … pe … padīpeyyaṁ deti. So kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjati.

Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā aṇḍajānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti.

Vīsatimaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn29.11-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN29.11]]
> ◄  [[sn29.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn29.21-sujato-pali]] ►
