---
sutta_code: "SN29.21"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN29.21]]
> ◄  [[sn29.11-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 29. Nāgasaṁyutta: On Dragons

### I. Dragons — SN29.21-50: Thirty Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become Womb-Born, Etc.
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the womb-born dragons … moisture-born dragons … spontaneously-born dragons?”

“bhikkhu, it’s when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. And they’ve heard: ‘The spontaneously-born dragons are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ They think: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born dragons!’ They give food … drink … a lamp. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born dragons. This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born dragons.”


3(Each set of ten discourses of this series should be treated in the same way.)


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā jalābujānaṁ nāgānaṁ … pe … saṁsedajānaṁ nāgānaṁ … pe … opapātikānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti?

2"Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena dvayakārī hoti, vācāya dvayakārī, manasā dvayakārī. Tassa sutaṁ hoti: ‘opapātikā nāgā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. Tassa evaṁ hoti: ‘aho vatāhaṁ kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā opapātikānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyyan’ti. So annaṁ deti … pe … pānaṁ deti … pe … padīpeyyaṁ deti. So kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā opapātikānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjati. Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā opapātikānaṁ nāgānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti.


3(Iminā peyyālena dasa dasa suttantā kātabbā. Evaṁ catūsu yonīsu cattālīsaṁ veyyākaraṇā honti. Purimehi pana dasahi suttantehi saha honti paṇṇāsasuttantāti.)


Nāgavaggo paṭhamo.

4Suddhikaṁ paṇītataraṁ,  
caturo ca uposathā;  
Tassa sutaṁ caturo ca,  
dānūpakārā ca tālīsaṁ;  
Paṇṇāsa piṇḍato suttā,  
nāgamhi suppakāsitāti.

Nāgasaṁyuttaṁ samattaṁ.

[[Clean Files 3/Bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN22-34/SN29/SN29.11-20/SN29.11-20#content]][[sn30#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn29.21-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN29.21]]
> ◄  [[sn29.11-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
