---
sutta_code: "AN10.80"
sutta_title:
  - "Āghātavatthu "
  - "Resentment Grounds"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.80]]
> ◄  [[an10.76-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an10.92-thanissaro]] ►

## AN10.80 Hatred

## ## Āghāta Sutta


“There are these ten ways of subduing hatred. Which ten?

[1] “Thinking, ‘He has done me harm. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[2] “Thinking, ‘He is doing me harm. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[3] “Thinking, ‘He is going to do me harm. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[4] “Thinking, ‘He has done harm to people who are dear & pleasing to me. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[5] “Thinking, ‘He is doing harm to people who are dear & pleasing to me. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[6] “Thinking, ‘He is going to do harm to people who are dear & pleasing to me. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[7] “Thinking, ‘He has aided people who are not dear or pleasing to me. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[8] “Thinking, ‘He is aiding people who are not dear or pleasing to me. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[9] “Thinking, ‘He is going to aid people who are not dear or pleasing to me. But what should I expect?’ one subdues hatred.

[10] “One does not get worked up over impossibilities.

“These are ten ways of subduing hatred.”

See also: [[an4.200-thanissaro]]; [[an5.161-thanissaro]]; [[an7.60-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.80-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 150 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN9.30]], [[AN10.79]], [[AN9.29]], [[DN33]], [[DN34]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.80]]
> ◄  [[an10.76-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an10.92-thanissaro]] ►
