---
sutta_code: "AN10.101"
sutta_title:
  - "Samaṇasaññā "
  - "Ascetics Perceptions"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.101]]
> ◄  [[an10.99-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an10.103-thanissaro]] ►

## AN10.101 Contemplative Perceptions

## ## Samaṇasaññā Sutta


“bhikkhus, three contemplative perceptions, when developed & pursued, bring seven things to completion. Which three?

“‘I have become casteless.

“‘My life is dependent on others.

“‘My behavior should be different (from that of householders).’

“These three contemplative perceptions, when developed & pursued, bring seven things to completion. Which seven?

“One acts & behaves consistently with the virtues.

“One isn’t greedy.

“One is devoid of ill will.

“One is devoid of arrogance.

“One desires training.

“One thinks, ‘They have this purpose,’ with regard to the requisites of life.

“One remains with one’s persistence aroused.

“bhikkhus, these three contemplative perceptions, when developed & pursued, bring these seven things to completion.”

See also: [[an5.57-thanissaro]]; [[an5.114-thanissaro]]; [[+Suttas/Sutta Texts/Thanissaro/Thanissaro notes/an-thanissaro/an10-thanissaro/an10.48-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.101-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 210 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.101]]
> ◄  [[an10.99-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an10.103-thanissaro]] ►
