---
sutta_code: "SN47.20"
sutta_title:
  - "Janapadakalyāṇīsutta "
  - "The Most Beautiful Girl of the Land"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN47]]  / 🌐 [[SN47.20]]
> ◄  [[sn47.19-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn47.21-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 47. Satipaṭṭhānasaṁyutta: On Mindfulness Meditation

### II. At Nālandā — SN47.20: The Finest Lady in the Land
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sumbhas, near the town of the Sumbhas called Sedaka. There the Buddha addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus!”

“Venerable sir,” they replied. The Buddha said this:

2“bhikkhus, suppose that on hearing, ‘The finest lady in the land! The finest lady in the land!’ a large crowd would gather. And the finest lady in the land would dance and sing in a most thrilling way. On hearing, ‘The finest lady in the land is dancing and singing! The finest lady in the land is dancing and singing!’ an even larger crowd would gather.

Then a person would come along who wants to live and doesn’t want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain. They’d say to him, ‘Mister, this is a bowl full to the brim with oil. You must carry it in between this large crowd and the finest lady in the land. And a man with a drawn sword will follow behind you. Wherever you spill even a drop, he’ll chop off your head right there.’

What do you think, bhikkhus? Would that person lose focus on that bowl, and negligently get distracted outside?”

“No, sir.”


3“I’ve made up this simile to make a point. And this is what it means. ‘A bowl of oil filled to the brim’ is a term for mindfulness of the body.

So you should train like this: ‘We will develop mindfulness of the body. We’ll cultivate it, make it our vehicle and our basis, keep it up, consolidate it, and properly implement it.’ That’s how you should train.”

#### Pali

1Evaṁ me sutaṁ— ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sumbhesu vihārati sedakaṁ nāma sumbhānaṁ nigamo. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: "bhikkhavo"ti.

"Bhadante"ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etadavoca: 

2"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ‘janapadakalyāṇī, janapadakalyāṇī’ti kho, bhikkhave, mahājanakāyo sannipateyya. ‘Sā kho panassa janapadakalyāṇī paramapāsāvinī nacce, paramapāsāvinī gīte. Janapadakalyāṇī naccati gāyatī’ti kho, bhikkhave, bhiyyoso mattāya mahājanakāyo sannipateyya.

Atha puriso āgaccheyya jīvitukāmo amaritukāmo sukhakāmo dukkhappaṭikūlo. Tamenaṁ evaṁ vadeyya: ‘Ayaṁ te, ambho purisa, samatittiko telapatto antarena ca mahāsamajjaṁ antarena ca janapadakalyāṇiyā pariharitabbo. Puriso ca te ukkhittāsiko piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhissati. Yattheva naṁ thokampi chaḍḍessati tattheva te siro pātessatī’ti.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, api nu so puriso amuṁ telapattaṁ amanasikaritvā bahiddhā pamādaṁ āhareyyā"ti?

"No hetaṁ, bhante".


3"Upamā kho myāyaṁ, bhikkhave, katā atthassa viññāpanāya. Ayaṁ cevettha attho – samatittiko telapattoti kho, bhikkhave, kāyagatāya etaṁ satiyā adhivacanaṁ.

Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṁ sikkhitabbaṁ: ‘kāyagatā sati no bhāvitā bhavissati bahulīkatā yānīkatā vatthukatā anuṭṭhitā paricitā susamāraddhā’ti. Evañhi kho, bhikkhave, sikkhitabban"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Nālandavaggo dutiyo.

4Mahāpuriso nālandaṁ,  
Cundo celañca bāhiyo;  
Uttiyo ariyo brahmā,  
Sedakaṁ janapadena cāti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn47.20-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA623]] | S v 169 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA623]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN47.19]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN47]]  / 🌐 [[SN47.20]]
> ◄  [[sn47.19-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn47.21-sujato-pali]] ►
