---
sutta_code: "SN47.46"
sutta_title:
  - "Pāṭimokkhasaṁvarasutta "
  - "The Restraint of the Pāṭimokkha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN47]]  / 🌐 [[SN47.46]]
> ◄  [[sn47.45-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn47.47-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 47. Satipaṭṭhānasaṁyutta: On Mindfulness Meditation

### V. The Deathless — SN47.46: Restraint in the Monastic Code
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

2“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.”

“Well then, bhikkhu, you should purify the starting point of skillful qualities. What is the starting point of skillful qualities? Live restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourself well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken. When you’ve done this, you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics.

3What four? Meditate observing an aspect of the body internally — keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world. Meditate observing an aspect of feelings … mind … principles — keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world.

When you develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way, depending on and grounded on ethics, you can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.”

And then that bhikkhu approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

4Then that bhikkhu, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is no return to any state of existence.” And that bhikkhu became one of the perfected.

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 

2"Sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṁ desetu, yamahaṁ bhagavato dhammaṁ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan"ti.

"Tasmātiha tvaṁ, bhikkhu, ādimeva visodhehi kusalesu dhammesu. Ko cādi kusalānaṁ dhammānaṁ? Idha tvaṁ, bhikkhu, pātimokkhasaṁvarasaṁvuto viharāhi ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhassu sikkhāpadesu. Yato kho tvaṁ, bhikkhu, pātimokkhasaṁvarasaṁvuto viharissasi ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī samādāya sikkhassu sikkhāpadesu; tato tvaṁ, bhikkhu, sīlaṁ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāveyyāsi.

3Katame cattāro? Idha tvaṁ, bhikkhu, kāye kāyānupassī viharāhi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṁ; vedanāsu … pe … citte … pe … dhammesu dhammānupassī viharāhi ātāpī sampajāno satimā, vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṁ.

Yato kho tvaṁ, bhikkhu, sīlaṁ nissāya sīle patiṭṭhāya ime cattāro satipaṭṭhāne evaṁ bhāvessasi, tato tuyhaṁ, bhikkhu, yā ratti vā divaso vā āgamissati vuddhiyeva pāṭikaṅkhā kusalesu dhammesu, no parihānī"ti.

Atha kho so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṁ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.

4Atha kho so bhikkhu eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihāranto nacirasseva – yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṁ – brahmacariyapariyosānaṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihārati.

"Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā"ti abbhaññāsi. Aññataro ca pana so bhikkhu arahataṁ ahosīti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn47.46-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA637]] | S v 187 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA637]], [[AN2.36:2.1]], [[DN2]], [[MN6]], [[SN47.3]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN47]]  / 🌐 [[SN47.46]]
> ◄  [[sn47.45-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn47.47-sujato-pali]] ►
