---
sutta_code: "SN22.94"
sutta_title:
  - "Pupphasutta "
  - "Flowers"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.94]]
> ◄  [[sn22.93-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.95-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### X. Flowers — SN22.94: Flowers
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I don’t argue with the world; it’s the world that argues with me. When your speech is in line with the teaching you don’t argue with anyone in the world. What the astute agree on as not existing, I too say does not exist. What the astute agree on as existing, I too say exists.

And what do the astute agree on as not existing, which I too say does not exist? Form that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.

Feeling …

Perception …

Choices …

Consciousness that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable. This is what the astute agree on as not existing, which I too say does not exist.

And what do the astute agree on as existing, which I too say exists? Form that is impermanent, suffering, and perishable.

Feeling … Perception … Choices …

Consciousness that is impermanent, suffering, and perishable. This is what the astute agree on as existing, which I too say exists.

There is a temporal phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends. Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

And what is that temporal phenomenon in the world? Form is a temporal phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends. Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

This being so, what can I do about a foolish ordinary person, blind and sightless, who does not know or see?

Feeling …

Perception …

Choices …

Consciousness is a temporal phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends. Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

This being so, what can I do about a foolish ordinary person, blind and sightless, who does not know or see?

Suppose there was a blue water lily, or a pink or white lotus. Though it sprouted and grew in the water, it would rise up above the water and stand with no water clinging to it. In the same way, though I was born and grew up in the world, I live having mastered the world, and the world does not cling to me.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Nāhaṁ, bhikkhave, lokena vivadāmi, lokova mayā vivadati. Na, bhikkhave, dhammavādī kenaci lokasmiṁ vivadati. Yaṁ, bhikkhave, natthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ, ahampi taṁ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi. Yaṁ, bhikkhave, atthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ, ahampi taṁ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi.

2Kiñca, bhikkhave, natthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ, yamahaṁ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi? Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, niccaṁ dhuvaṁ sassataṁ avipariṇāmadhammaṁ natthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ; ahampi taṁ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi. Vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ niccaṁ dhuvaṁ sassataṁ avipariṇāmadhammaṁ natthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ; ahampi taṁ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi.

Idaṁ kho, bhikkhave, natthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ; ahampi taṁ ‘natthī’ti vadāmi.

3Kiñca, bhikkhave, atthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ, yamahaṁ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi? Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ atthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ; ahampi taṁ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi. Vedanā aniccā … pe … viññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ atthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ; ahampi taṁ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi. Idaṁ kho, bhikkhave, atthisammataṁ loke paṇḍitānaṁ; ahampi taṁ ‘atthī’ti vadāmi.

4Atthi, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo, taṁ tathāgato abhisambujjhati abhisameti; abhisambujjhitvā abhisametvā taṁ ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti.

5Kiñca, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo, taṁ tathāgato abhisambujjhati abhisameti, abhisambujjhitvā abhisametvā ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti?

Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo taṁ tathāgato abhisambujjhati abhisameti. Abhisambujjhitvā abhisametvā ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti.

6Yo, bhikkhave, tathāgatena evaṁ ācikkhiyamāne desiyamāne paññapiyamāne paṭṭhapiyamāne vivariyamāne vibhajiyamāne uttānīkariyamāne na jānāti na passati tamahaṁ, bhikkhave, bālaṁ puthujjanaṁ andhaṁ acakkhukaṁ ajānantaṁ apassantaṁ kinti karomi.

Vedanā, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo … pe … saññā, bhikkhave … saṅkhārā, bhikkhave … viññāṇaṁ, bhikkhave, loke lokadhammo taṁ tathāgato abhisambujjhati abhisameti. Abhisambujjhitvā abhisametvā ācikkhati deseti paññapeti paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti.

7Yo, bhikkhave, tathāgatena evaṁ ācikkhiyamāne desiyamāne paññapiyamāne paṭṭhapiyamāne vivariyamāne vibhajiyamāne uttānīkariyamāne na jānāti na passati tamahaṁ, bhikkhave, bālaṁ puthujjanaṁ andhaṁ acakkhukaṁ ajānantaṁ apassantaṁ kinti karomi.

8Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uppalaṁ vā padumaṁ vā puṇḍarīkaṁ vā udake jātaṁ udake saṁvaḍḍhaṁ udakā accuggamma ṭhāti anupalittaṁ udakena; evameva kho, bhikkhave, tathāgato loke jāto loke saṁvaḍḍho lokaṁ abhibhuyya vihārati anupalitto lokenā"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.94-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA37]], [[SA38]] | S iii 138 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA38]], [[SA37]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN2.38]], [[AN230]], [[AN231]], [[AN232]], [[AN233]], [[AN234]], [[AN235]], [[AN236]], [[AN237]], [[AN238]], [[AN239]], [[AN3]], [[SEETOOAN5.152]], [[AN12]], [[AN13]], [[AN14]], [[AN15]], [[AN16]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.94]]
> ◄  [[sn22.93-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.95-sujato-pali]] ►
