---
sutta_code: "SN22.106"
sutta_title:
  - "Pariññeyyasutta "
  - "To Be Fully Understood"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.106]]
> ◄  [[sn22.105-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.107-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XI. Sides — SN22.106: Should Be Completely Understood
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the things that should be completely understood, complete understanding, and the person who has completely understood. Listen …

And what things should be completely understood? Form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. These are called the things that should be completely understood.

And what is complete understanding? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is called complete understanding.

And what is the person who has completely understood? It should be said: a perfected one, the venerable of such and such name and clan. This is called the person who has completely understood.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Pariññeyye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi pariññāñca pariññātāviñca puggalaṁ. Taṁ suṇātha. Katame ca, bhikkhave, pariññeyyā dhammā?

Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, pariññeyyo dhammo. Vedanā … pe … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ pariññeyyo dhammo. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, pariññeyyā dhammā.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, pariññā? Rāgakkhayo, dosakkhayo, mohakkhayo – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, pariññā.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, pariññātāvī puggalo? Arahātissa vacanīyaṁ. Yvāyaṁ āyasmā evaṁnāmo evaṅgotto – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, pariññātāvī puggalo"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.106-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA72]] | S iii 159 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN22.23]], [[SA72]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.106]]
> ◄  [[sn22.105-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.107-sujato-pali]] ►
