---
sutta_code: "SN22.32"
sutta_title:
  - "Pabhaṅgusutta "
  - "The Fragile"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.32]]
> ◄  [[sn22.31-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.33-sujato-pali]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### III. The Burden — SN22.32: The Breakable
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the breakable and the unbreakable. Listen …

And what is the breakable? What is the unbreakable? Form is breakable, but its cessation, settling, and ending is unbreakable.

Feeling … perception … choices … consciousness is breakable, but its cessation, settling, and ending is unbreakable.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Pabhaṅguñca, bhikkhave, desessāmi appabhaṅguñca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Kiñca, bhikkhave, pabhaṅgu, kiṁ appabhaṅgu? Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, pabhaṅgu. Yo tassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, idaṁ appabhaṅgu.

Vedanā pabhaṅgu. Yo tassā nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, idaṁ appabhaṅgu. Saññā pabhaṅgu … saṅkhārā pabhaṅgu. Yo tesaṁ nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, idaṁ appabhaṅgu. Viññāṇaṁ pabhaṅgu. Yo tassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, idaṁ appabhaṅgū”ti.


Ekādasamaṁ.

Bhāravaggo tatiyo.  
Tassuddānaṁ

Bhāraṁ pariññaṁ abhijānaṁ,  
chandarāgaṁ catutthakaṁ;  
Assādā ca tayo vuttā, abhinandanamaṭṭhamaṁ;  
Uppādaṁ aghamūlañca,  
ekādasamo pabhaṅgūti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.32-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA51]] | S iii 32 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA51]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.23]], [[SN14:35-36.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.32]]
> ◄  [[sn22.31-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.33-sujato-pali]] ►
