---
sutta_code: "SN22.54"
sutta_title:
  - "Bījasutta "
  - "Seeds"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.54]]
> ◄  [[sn22.53-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.55-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### VI. Involvement — SN22.54: A Seed
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, there are five kinds of plants propagated from seeds. What five? Plants propagated from roots, stems, cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds are the fifth.

Suppose these five kinds of plants propagated from seeds were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. But there’s no soil or water. Then would these five kinds of plants propagated from seeds reach growth, increase, and maturity?”

“No, sir.”

“Suppose these five kinds of plants propagated from seeds were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. And there is soil and water. Then would these five kinds of plants propagated from seeds reach growth, increase, and maturity?”


“Yes, sir.”

“The four grounds of consciousness should be seen as like the earth element. Relishing and greed should be seen as like the water element. Consciousness with its fuel should be seen as like the five kinds of plants propagated from seeds.

2As long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with form, supported by form, grounded on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.

Or consciousness would remain involved with feeling …

Or consciousness would remain involved with perception …

Or as long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with choices, supported by choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.

3bhikkhus, suppose you say: ‘Apart from form, feeling, perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and going of consciousness, its passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.’ That is not possible.


4If a bhikkhu has given up greed for the form element, the support is cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness.

If a bhikkhu has given up greed for the feeling element …

perception element …

choices element …


consciousness element, the support is cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness. Since that consciousness does not become established and does not grow, with no power to regenerate, it is freed.

Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s content. Being content, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended … there is no return to any state of existence.’”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, bījajātāni. Katamāni pañca? Mūlabījaṁ, khandhabījaṁ, aggabījaṁ, phalubījaṁ, bījabījaññeva pañcamaṁ.

Imāni cassu, bhikkhave, pañca bījajātāni akhaṇḍāni apūtikāni avātātapahatāni sārādāni sukhasayitāni, pathavī ca nāssa, āpo ca nāssa; api numāni, bhikkhave, pañca bījajātāni vuddhiṁ virūḷhiṁ vepullaṁ āpajjeyyun"ti?

"No hetaṁ, bhante".

"Imāni cassu, bhikkhave, pañca bījajātāni akhaṇḍāni … pe … sukhasayitāni, pathavī ca assa, āpo ca assa; api numāni, bhikkhave, pañca bījajātāni vuddhiṁ virūḷhiṁ vepullaṁ āpajjeyyun"ti?


"Evaṁ, bhante".

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pathavīdhātu, evaṁ catasso viññāṇaṭṭhitiyo daṭṭhabbā. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, āpodhātu, evaṁ nandirāgo daṭṭhabbo. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pañca bījajātāni, evaṁ viññāṇaṁ sāhāraṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ.

2Rūpupayaṁ, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṁ tiṭṭhamānaṁ tiṭṭheyya, rūpārammaṇaṁ rūpappatiṭṭhaṁ nandūpasecanaṁ vuddhiṁ virūḷhiṁ vepullaṁ āpajjeyya.

Vedanupayaṁ vā, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṁ tiṭṭhamānaṁ tiṭṭheyya … pe …

saññupayaṁ vā, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṁ tiṭṭhamānaṁ tiṭṭheyya … pe …

saṅkhārupayaṁ vā, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṁ tiṭṭhamānaṁ tiṭṭheyya, saṅkhārārammaṇaṁ saṅkhārappatiṭṭhaṁ nandūpasecanaṁ vuddhiṁ virūḷhiṁ vepullaṁ āpajjeyya.

3Yo, bhikkhave, evaṁ vadeyya: ‘ahamaññatra rūpā aññatra vedanāya aññatra saññāya aññatra saṅkhārehi viññāṇassa āgatiṁ vā gatiṁ vā cutiṁ vā upapattiṁ vā vuddhiṁ vā virūḷhiṁ vā vepullaṁ vā paññāpessāmī’ti, netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.


4Rūpadhātuyā ceva, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno rāgo pahīno hoti. Rāgassa pahānā vocchijjatārammaṇaṁ patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti.

Vedanādhātuyā ce … saññādhātuyā ce …

saṅkhāradhātuyā ce …


viññāṇadhātuyā ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno rāgo pahīno hoti. Rāgassa pahānā vocchijjatārammaṇaṁ patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti.

Tadappatiṭṭhitaṁ viññāṇaṁ avirūḷhaṁ anabhisaṅkhacca vimuttaṁ. Vimuttattā ṭhitaṁ. Ṭhitattā santusitaṁ. Santusitattā na paritassati. Aparitassaṁ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati.

‘Khīṇā jāti … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.54-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA39]] | S iii 54 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA39]], [[SN22.53]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.38]], [[SN12.39]], [[SN12.40]], [[AN12.64]], [[AND22.3]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.54]]
> ◄  [[sn22.53-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.55-sujato-pali]] ►
