---
sutta_code: "SN22.18"
sutta_title:
  - "Sahetuaniccasutta "
  - "Impermanent with Cause"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.18]]
> ◄  [[sn22.17-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.19-sujato-pali]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### II. Impermanence — SN22.18: Impermanence With Its Cause
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, form is impermanent. The cause and condition that gives rise to form is also impermanent. Since form is produced by what is impermanent, how could it be permanent?


Feeling is impermanent …


Perception is impermanent …


Choices are impermanent …


Consciousness is impermanent. The cause and condition that gives rise to consciousness is also impermanent. Since consciousness is produced by what is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo rūpassa uppādāya, sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ kuto niccaṁ bhavissati.


Vedanā aniccā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo vedanāya uppādāya, sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūtā, bhikkhave, vedanā kuto niccā bhavissati.


Saññā aniccā …


saṅkhārā aniccā. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo saṅkhārānaṁ uppādāya, sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūtā, bhikkhave, saṅkhārā kuto niccā bhavissanti.


Viññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo viññāṇassa uppādāya, sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, viññāṇaṁ kuto niccaṁ bhavissati.

Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 23 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.18]]
> ◄  [[sn22.17-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.19-sujato-pali]] ►
