---
sutta_code: "SN22.74"
sutta_title:
  - "Samudayasutta "
  - "Origin (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.74]]
> ◄  [[sn22.73-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.75-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### VIII. Itchy — SN22.74: Origin
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, an uneducated ordinary person doesn’t truly understand the origin, the ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. An educated noble disciple does truly understand the origin, the ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Assutavā, bhikkhave, puthujjano rūpassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāti. Vedanāya … saññāya … saṅkhārānaṁ … viññāṇassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāti.

Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako rūpassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. Vedanāya … saññāya … saṅkhārānaṁ … viññāṇassa samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ pajānātī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.74-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 82 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.74]]
> ◄  [[sn22.73-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.75-sujato-pali]] ►
