---
sutta_code: "SN22.103"
sutta_title:
  - "Antasutta "
  - "Portions"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.103]]
> ◄  [[sn22.102-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.104-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XI. Sides — SN22.103: Sides
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, there are these four sides. What four? The side of identity, the side of the origin of identity, the side of the cessation of identity, and the side of the practice that leads to the cessation of identity.

And what is the side of identity? It should be said: the five grasping aggregates. What five? That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is called the side of identity.


2And what is the side of the origin of identity? It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure in various different realms. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. This is called the side of the origin of identity.

3And what is the side of the cessation of identity? It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not adhering to it. This is called the side of the cessation of identity.

4And what is the side of the practice that leads to the cessation of identity? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the side of the practice that leads to the cessation of identity.


These are the four sides.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Cattārome, bhikkhave, antā. Katame cattāro? Sakkāyanto, sakkāyasamudayanto, sakkāyanirodhanto, sakkāyanirodhagāminippaṭipadānto.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanto? Pañcupādānakkhandhātissa vacanīyaṁ. Katame pañca? Seyyathidaṁ – rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanto.


2Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayanto? Yāyaṁ taṇhā ponobhavikā nandirāgasahagatā tatratatrābhinandinī, seyyathidaṁ – kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayanto.

3Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhanto? Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodho cāgo paṭinissaggo mutti anālayo – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhanto.

4Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminippaṭipadānto? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo. Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminippaṭipadānto.


Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro antā"ti.


Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.103-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA70]] | S iii 157 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA70]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.103]]
> ◄  [[sn22.102-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.104-sujato-pali]] ►
