---
sutta_code: "SN22.82"
sutta_title:
  - "Puṇṇamasutta "
  - "The Full-Moon Night"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.82]]
> ◄  [[sn22.81-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.83-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### VIII. Itchy — SN22.82: A Full Moon Night
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother, together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus. Now, at that time it was the sabbath — the full moon on the fifteenth day — and the Buddha was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.

Then one of the bhikkhus got up from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, raised their joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:

“Sir, I’d like to ask the Buddha about a certain point, if you’d take the time to answer.”

“Well then, bhikkhu, take your own seat and ask what you wish.”

“Yes, sir,” replied that bhikkhu. He took his seat and said to the Buddha:

“Sir, are these the five grasping aggregates, that is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?”

“Yes, they are,” replied the Buddha.

Saying “Good, sir”, that bhikkhu approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

“But sir, what is the root of these five grasping aggregates?”

“These five grasping aggregates are rooted in desire.” … “But sir, is that grasping the exact same thing as the five grasping aggregates? Or is grasping one thing and the five grasping aggregates another?”

“Neither. Rather, the desire and greed for them is the grasping there.”

Saying “Good, sir”, that bhikkhu asked another question:

“But sir, can there be different kinds of desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates?”

“There can,” said the Buddha.

“It’s when someone thinks: ‘In the future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such choices, or such consciousness!’ That’s how there can be different kinds of desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates.”

Saying “Good, sir”, that bhikkhu asked another question:

“Sir, what is the scope of the term ‘aggregates’ as applied to the aggregates?”

“Any kind of form at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of form. Any kind of feeling at all … Any kind of perception at all … Any kind of choices at all … Any kind of consciousness at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of consciousness. That’s the scope of the term ‘aggregates’ as applied to the aggregates.”

Saying “Good, sir”, that bhikkhu asked another question:

“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the aggregate of form is found? What is the cause, what is the reason why the aggregate of feeling … perception … choices … consciousness is found?”

“The four primary elements are the reason why the aggregate of form is found. Contact is the reason why the aggregates of feeling, perception, and choices are found. Name and form are the reasons why the aggregate of consciousness is found.”

Saying “Good, sir”, that bhikkhu asked another question:

“Sir, how does identity view come about?”

“It’s because an uneducated ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the good persons. They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. They regard feeling … perception … choices … consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. That’s how identity view comes about.”

Saying “Good, sir”, that bhikkhu … asked another question:

“But sir, how does identity view not come about?”

It’s because an educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. They don’t regard feeling … perception … choices … consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. That’s how identity view does not come about.”

Saying “Good, sir”, that bhikkhu … asked another question:

“Sir, what’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?”

“The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its gratification. That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this is its escape. The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling … perception … choices … consciousness: this is its gratification. That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness: this is its escape.”

Saying “Good, sir”, that bhikkhu approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

“Sir, how does one know and see so that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli?”

“One truly sees any kind of form at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form — with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ They truly see any kind of feeling … perception … choices … consciousness at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, *all* consciousness — with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ That’s how to know and see so that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli.”

Now at that time one of the bhikkhus had the thought:

“So it seems, good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self. Then what self will the deeds done by not-self affect?”

Then the Buddha, knowing what that bhikkhu was thinking, addressed the bhikkhus:

“It’s possible that some foolish person here — unknowing and ignorant, their mind dominated by craving — thinks they can overstep the teacher’s instructions. They think: ‘So it seems, good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self. Then what self will the deeds done by not-self affect?’ Now, bhikkhus, you have been educated by me in questioning with regards to all these things in all such cases.


14What do you think, bhikkhus? Is form permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, sir.”

“Is feeling … perception … choices … consciousness permanent or impermanent?”


“Impermanent, sir.”

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

“Suffering, sir.”

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”


“No, sir.”

“So you should truly see … Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

15“Two on the aggregates; exactly the same; and can there be;  
on the term; and on the cause;  
two questions on identity;  
gratification; and that with consciousness:  
these are the ten questions  
the bhikkhu came to ask.”


#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati pubbārāme migāramātupāsāde mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṁ. Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā tadahuposathe pannarase puṇṇāya puṇṇamāya rattiyā bhikkhusaṅghaparivuto ajjhokāse nisinno hoti.

2Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṁ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "puccheyyāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavantaṁ kiñcideva desaṁ, sace me bhagavā okāsaṁ karoti pañhassa veyyākaraṇāyā"ti?

"Tena hi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, sake āsane nisīditvā puccha yadākaṅkhasī"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante" ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato paṭissutvā sake āsane nisīditvā bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ime nu kho, bhante, pañcupādānakkhandhā, seyyathidaṁ – rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho"ti.

3"Ime kho, bhikkhu, pañcupādānakkhandhā; seyyathidaṁ – rūpupādānakkhandho … pe … viññāṇupādānakkhandho"ti.

"Sādhu, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṁ abhinanditvā anumoditvā bhagavantaṁ uttariṁ pañhaṁ apucchi: 

4"Ime kho pana, bhante, pañcupādānakkhandhā kiṁmūlakā"ti?

"Ime kho, bhikkhu, pañcupādānakkhandhā chandamūlakā"

ti … pe … taññeva nu kho, bhante, upādānaṁ te pañcupādānakkhandhā udāhu aññatra pañcahi upādānakkhandhehi upādānan"ti?

"Na kho, bhikkhu, taññeva upādānaṁ te pañcupādānakkhandhā nāpi aññatra pañcahi upādānakkhandhehi upādānaṁ, api ca yo tattha chandarāgo taṁ tattha upādānan"ti.

"Sādhu, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … uttariṁ pañhaṁ apucchi: 

5"Siyā pana, bhante, pañcupādānakkhandhesu chandarāgavemattatā"ti?

"Siyā, bhikkhū"ti bhagavā avoca: "idha, bhikkhu, ekaccassa evaṁ hoti: ‘evaṁrūpo siyaṁ anāgatamaddhānaṁ, evaṁvedano siyaṁ anāgatamaddhānaṁ, evaṁsañño siyaṁ anāgatamaddhānaṁ, evaṁsaṅkhāro siyaṁ anāgatamaddhānaṁ, evaṁviññāṇo siyaṁ anāgatamaddhānan’ti. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhu, siyā pañcupādānakkhandhesu chandarāgavemattatā"ti?

"Sādhu, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … uttariṁ pañhaṁ apucchi: 

6"Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, khandhānaṁ khandhādhivacanan"ti?

"Yaṁ kiñci, bhikkhu, rūpaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṁ vā sukhumaṁ vā hīnaṁ vā paṇītaṁ vā yaṁ dūre santike vā, ayaṁ vuccati rūpakkhandho. Yā kāci vedanā … yā kāci saññā … ye keci saṅkhārā … yaṁ kiñci viññāṇaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṁ vā sukhumaṁ vā hīnaṁ vā paṇītaṁ vā yaṁ dūre santike vā, ayaṁ vuccati viññāṇakkhandho. Ettāvatā kho, bhikkhu, khandhānaṁ khandhādhivacanan"ti.

"Sādhu, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … apucchi: 

7"Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo rūpakkhandhassa paññāpanāya; ko hetu ko paccayo vedanākkhandhassa paññāpanāya; ko hetu ko paccayo saññākkhandhassa paññāpanāya; ko hetu ko paccayo saṅkhārakkhandhassa paññāpanāya; ko hetu ko paccayo viññāṇakkhandhassa paññāpanāyā"ti?

"Cattāro kho, bhikkhu, mahābhūtā hetu, cattāro mahābhūtā paccayo rūpakkhandhassa paññāpanāya. Phasso hetu phasso paccayo vedanākkhandhassa paññāpanāya. Phasso hetu phasso paccayo saññākkhandhassa paññāpanāya. Phasso hetu, phasso paccayo saṅkhārakkhandhassa paññāpanāya. Nāmarūpaṁ hetu, nāmarūpaṁ paccayo viññāṇakkhandhassa paññāpanāyā"ti. "Sādhu, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … apucchi: 

8"Kathaṁ nu kho, bhante, sakkāyadiṭṭhi hotī"ti?

"Idha, bhikkhu, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṁ adassāvī ariyadhammassa akovido ariyadhamme avinīto, sappurisānaṁ adassāvī sappurisadhammassa akovido sappurisadhamme avinīto rūpaṁ attato samanupassati, rūpavantaṁ vā attānaṁ; attani vā rūpaṁ, rūpasmiṁ vā attānaṁ; vedanāṁ … saññaṁ … saṅkhāre … viññāṇaṁ … attato samanupassati, viññāṇavantaṁ vā attānaṁ; attani vā viññāṇaṁ, viññāṇasmiṁ vā attānaṁ. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhu, sakkāyadiṭṭhi hotī"ti.

"Sādhu, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … apucchi: 

9"Kathaṁ pana, bhante, sakkāyadiṭṭhi na hotī"ti?

"Idha, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako ariyānaṁ dassāvī ariyadhammassa kovido ariyadhamme suvinīto, sappurisānaṁ dassāvī sappurisadhammassa kovido sappurisadhamme suvinīto na rūpaṁ attato samanupassati, na rūpavantaṁ vā attānaṁ; na attani vā rūpaṁ, na rūpasmiṁ vā attānaṁ; na vedanāṁ … na saññaṁ … na saṅkhāre … na viññāṇaṁ attato samanupassati, na viññāṇavantaṁ vā attānaṁ; na attani vā viññāṇaṁ, na viññāṇasmiṁ vā attānaṁ. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhu, sakkāyadiṭṭhi na hotī"ti.

"Sādhu, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu … pe … apucchi: 

10"Ko nu kho, bhante, rūpassa assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṁ nissaraṇaṁ; ko vedanāya … ko saññāya … ko saṅkhārānaṁ … ko viññāṇassa assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṁ nissaraṇan"ti?

"Yaṁ kho, bhikkhu, rūpaṁ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṁ somanassaṁ – ayaṁ rūpassa assādo. Yaṁ rūpaṁ aniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ – ayaṁ rūpassa ādīnavo. Yo rūpasmiṁ chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṁ – idaṁ rūpassa nissaraṇaṁ. Yaṁ vedanāṁ paṭicca … yaṁ saññaṁ paṭicca … ye saṅkhāre paṭicca … yaṁ viññāṇaṁ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṁ somanassaṁ – ayaṁ viññāṇassa assādo. Yaṁ viññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ – ayaṁ viññāṇassa ādīnavo. Yo viññāṇasmiṁ chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṁ – idaṁ viññāṇassa nissaraṇan"ti.

"Sādhu, bhante"ti kho so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṁ abhinanditvā anumoditvā bhagavantaṁ uttariṁ pañhaṁ apucchi: 

11"Kathaṁ nu kho, bhante, jānato, kathaṁ passato imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na hontī"ti?

"Yaṁ kiñci, bhikkhu, rūpaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṁ vā sukhumaṁ vā hīnaṁ vā paṇītaṁ vā yaṁ dūre santike vā, sabbaṁ rūpaṁ: ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya passati.

Yā kāci vedanā … yā kāci saññā … ye keci saṅkhārā … yaṁ kiñci viññāṇaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṁ vā sukhumaṁ vā hīnaṁ vā paṇītaṁ vā yaṁ dūre santike vā, sabbaṁ viññāṇaṁ: ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya passati.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhu, jānato evaṁ passato imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānānusayā na hontī"ti.

12Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno evaṁ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: "iti kira bho rūpaṁ anattā, vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ anattā; anattakatāni kammāni kathamattānaṁ phusissantī"ti.

Atha kho bhagavā tassa bhikkhuno cetasā ceto parivitakkamaññāya bhikkhū āmantesi: 

13"Ṭhānaṁ kho panetaṁ, bhikkhave, vijjati yaṁ idhekacco moghapuriso avidvā avijjāgato taṇhādhipateyyena cetasā satthusāsanaṁ atidhāvitabbaṁ maññeyya. ‘Iti kira, bho, rūpaṁ anattā, vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ anattā. Anattakatāni kammāni kathamattānaṁ phusissantī’ti? Paṭipucchāvinītā kho me tumhe, bhikkhave, tatra tatra tesu tesu dhammesu.


14Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?

"Aniccaṁ, bhante".

"Vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


"Aniccaṁ, bhante".

"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vā taṁ sukhaṁ vā"ti?

"Dukkhaṁ, bhante".

"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ, kallaṁ nu taṁ samanupassituṁ: ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’"ti?


"No hetaṁ, bhante".

Tasmātiha … pe … evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyāti pajānātī"ti.

15"Dve khandhā taññeva siyaṁ,  
adhivacanañca hetunā;  
Sakkāyena duve vuttā,  
assādaviññāṇakena ca;  
Ete dasavidhā vuttā,  
hoti bhikkhu pucchāyā"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
aKhajjanīyavaggo tatiyo.

16Assādo dve samudayā,  
arahantehi apare dve;  
Sīho khajjanī piṇḍolyaṁ,  
pālileyyena puṇṇamāti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.82-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA58]] | S iii 100 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN109]], [[SA58]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN19]], [[SN22.5]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.82]]
> ◄  [[sn22.81-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.83-sujato-pali]] ►
