---
sutta_code: "SN22.45"
sutta_title:
  - "Aniccasutta "
  - "Impermanent (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.45]]
> ◄  [[sn22.44-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.46-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### V. Be Your Own Island — SN22.45: Impermanence
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, form is impermanent. What’s impermanent is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ Seeing truly with right understanding like this, the mind becomes dispassionate and freed from defilements by not grasping.

Feeling is impermanent …

Perception …

Choices …

Consciousness is impermanent. What’s impermanent is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ Seeing truly with right understanding like this, the mind becomes dispassionate and freed from defilements by not grasping.

If a bhikkhu’s mind is dispassionate towards the form element, the feeling element, the perception element, the choices element, and the consciousness element, it’s freed from defilements by not grasping.

Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s content. Being content, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ; yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ. Evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya passato cittaṁ virajjati vimuccati anupādāya āsavehi.

Vedanā aniccā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ; yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ. Evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya passato cittaṁ virajjati vimuccati anupādāya āsavehi.

Rūpadhātuyā ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno cittaṁ virattaṁ vimuttaṁ hoti anupādāya āsavehi, vedanādhātuyā … pe … saññādhātuyā … saṅkhāradhātuyā … viññāṇadhātuyā ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno cittaṁ virattaṁ vimuttaṁ hoti anupādāya āsavehi.

Vimuttattā ṭhitaṁ. Ṭhitattā santusitaṁ. Santusitattā na paritassati. Aparitassaṁ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati. ‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.45-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA84]] | S iii 44 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA84]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DN1]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.45]]
> ◄  [[sn22.44-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.46-sujato-pali]] ►
