---
sutta_code: "SN22.92"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyarāhulasutta "
  - "Rahula (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.92]]
> ◄  [[sn22.91-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.93-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### IX. Senior bhikkhus — SN22.92: Rāhula (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, Rāhula said to the Buddha:

“Sir, how does one know and see so that the mind is rid of ego, possessiveness, and conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli; and going beyond discrimination, it’s peaceful and well freed?”

“Rāhula, when one truly sees any kind of form at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form — with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self,’ one is freed by not grasping.

One truly sees any kind of feeling … perception … choices … When one truly sees any kind of consciousness at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* consciousness — with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self,’ one is freed by not grasping.

That’s how to know and see so that the mind is rid of ego, possessiveness, and conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli; and going beyond discrimination, it’s peaceful and well freed.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā rāhulo bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "Kathaṁ nu kho, bhante, jānato kathaṁ passato imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānāpagataṁ mānasaṁ hoti vidhāsamatikkantaṁ santaṁ suvimuttan"ti?

2"Yaṁ kiñci, rāhula, rūpaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā … pe … yaṁ dūre santike vā, sabbaṁ rūpaṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya disvā anupādā vimutto hoti.

Yā kāci vedanā … yā kāci saññā … ye keci saṅkhārā … yaṁ kiñci viññāṇaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṁ vā sukhumaṁ vā hīnaṁ vā paṇītaṁ vā yaṁ dūre santike vā, sabbaṁ viññāṇaṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya disvā anupādā vimutto hoti.

Evaṁ kho, rāhula, jānato evaṁ passato imasmiñca saviññāṇake kāye bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu ahaṅkāramamaṅkāramānāpagataṁ mānasaṁ hoti vidhāsamatikkantaṁ santaṁ suvimuttan"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Theravaggo catuttho.

3Ānando tisso yamako,  
anurādho ca vakkali;  
Assaji khemako channo,  
rāhulā apare duve.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.92-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA199]], [[SA24]] | S iii 136 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA199]], [[SA24]], [[SN18.22]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.92]]
> ◄  [[sn22.91-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.93-sujato-pali]] ►
