---
sutta_code: "SN22.27"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyaassādasutta "
  - "Gratification (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.27]]
> ◄  [[sn22.26-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.28-sujato-pali]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### III. The Burden — SN22.27: Gratification (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I went in search of form’s gratification, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s gratification. I went in search of form’s drawback, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s drawback. I went in search of form’s escape, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s escape.

2went in search of the gratification of feeling … perception … choices … and consciousness, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s gratification. I went in search of consciousness’s drawback, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s drawback. I went in search of consciousness’s escape, and I found it. I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s escape.


3As long as I didn’t truly understand these five grasping aggregates’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening … But when I did truly understand these five grasping aggregates’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening …

Knowledge and vision arose in me: ‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there are no more future lives.’”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Rūpassāhaṁ, bhikkhave, assādapariyesanaṁ acariṁ. Yo rūpassa assādo tadajjhagamaṁ. Yāvatā rūpassa assādo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. Rūpassāhaṁ, bhikkhave, ādīnavapariyesanaṁ acariṁ. Yo rūpassa ādīnavo tadajjhagamaṁ. Yāvatā rūpassa ādīnavo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. Rūpassāhaṁ, bhikkhave, nissaraṇapariyesanaṁ acariṁ. Yaṁ rūpassa nissaraṇaṁ tadajjhagamaṁ. Yāvatā rūpassa nissaraṇaṁ paññāya me taṁ sudiṭṭhaṁ.

2Vedanāyāhaṁ, bhikkhave … saññāyāhaṁ, bhikkhave … saṅkhārānāhaṁ, bhikkhave … viññāṇassāhaṁ, bhikkhave, assādapariyesanaṁ acariṁ. Yo viññāṇassa assādo tadajjhagamaṁ. Yāvatā viññāṇassa assādo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. Viññāṇassāhaṁ, bhikkhave, ādīnavapariyesanaṁ acariṁ. Yo viññāṇassa ādīnavo tadajjhagamaṁ. Yāvatā viññāṇassa ādīnavo paññāya me so sudiṭṭho. Viññāṇassāhaṁ, bhikkhave, nissaraṇapariyesanaṁ acariṁ. Yaṁ viññāṇassa nissaraṇaṁ tadajjhagamaṁ. Yāvatā viññāṇassa nissaraṇaṁ paññāya me taṁ sudiṭṭhaṁ.


3Yāvakīvañcāhaṁ, bhikkhave, imesaṁ pañcannaṁ upādānakkhandhānaṁ assādañca assādato ādīnavañca ādīnavato nissaraṇañca nissaraṇato yathābhūtaṁ nābbhaññāsiṁ … pe … abbhaññāsiṁ.

Ñāṇañca pana me dassanaṁ udapādi: ‘akuppā me vimutti; ayamantimā jāti; natthi dāni punabbhavo’”ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.27-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA14]] | S iii 29 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA14]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.11]], [[SN35.12]], [[SN35.13]], [[SN35.14]], [[SN35.15]], [[SN35.16]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.27]]
> ◄  [[sn22.26-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.28-sujato-pali]] ►
