---
sutta_code: "SN22.121"
sutta_title:
  - "Upādāniyasutta "
  - "Things That Can Be Clung To"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.121]]
> ◄  [[sn22.120-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.122-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XII. A Dhamma Speaker — SN22.121: Things Prone To Being Grasped
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the things that are prone to being grasped, and the grasping. Listen …

What are the things that are prone to being grasped? And what is the grasping?

Form is something that’s prone to being grasped. The desire and greed for it is the grasping. Feeling … Perception … Choices … Consciousness is something that’s prone to being grasped. The desire and greed for it is the grasping.

These are called the things that are prone to being grasped, and this is the grasping.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Upādāniye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi upādānañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā, katamaṁ upādānaṁ? Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, upādāniyo dhammo, yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha upādānaṁ. Vedanā … pe … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ upādāniyo dhammo; yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha upādānaṁ.

Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, upādāniyā dhammā, idaṁ upādānan"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.121-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 166 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.121]]
> ◄  [[sn22.120-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.122-sujato-pali]] ►
