---
sutta_code: "SN22.102"
sutta_title:
  - "Aniccasaññāsutta "
  - "Perception of Impermanence"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.102]]
> ◄  [[sn22.101-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.103-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### X. Flowers — SN22.102: The Perception of Impermanence
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, when the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated it eliminates all desire for sensual pleasures, for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, and for rebirth in a future life. It eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

2In the autumn, a farmer ploughing with a large plough shears through all the root networks. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.


3A reed-cutter, having cut the reeds, grabs them at the top and shakes them down, shakes them about, and shakes them off. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

4When the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to the stalk will follow along. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

5The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

6Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

7Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the best. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

8Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

9All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

10The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the moon’s radiance, so the moon’s radiance is said to be the best of them all. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

11After the rainy season the sky is clear and cloudless. And when the sun rises, it dispels all the darkness from the sky as it shines and glows and radiates. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated it eliminates all desire for sensual pleasures, for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, and for rebirth in a future life. It eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.

12And how is the perception of impermanence developed and cultivated so that … it eradicates all conceit ‘I am’? ‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is feeling … Such is perception … Such are choices … Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’

That’s how the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated so that it eliminates all desire for sensual pleasures, for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, and for rebirth in a future life. That’s how it eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all conceit ‘I am’.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Aniccasaññā, bhikkhave, bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabbaṁ kāmarāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ rūparāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ bhavarāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ avijjāṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

2Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, saradasamaye kassako mahānaṅgalena kasanto sabbāni mūlasantānakāni sampadālento kasati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabbaṁ kāmarāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ rūparāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ bhavarāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ avijjāṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.


3Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, pabbajalāyako pabbajaṁ lāyitvā agge gahetvā odhunāti niddhunāti nicchoṭeti; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabbaṁ kāmarāgaṁ pariyādiyati … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

4Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ambapiṇḍiyā vaṇṭacchinnāya yāni tattha ambāni vaṇṭapaṭibandhāni sabbāni tāni tadanvayāni bhavanti; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

5Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kūṭāgārassa yā kāci gopānasiyo sabbā tā kūṭaṅgamā kūṭaninnā kūṭasamosaraṇā, kūṭaṁ tāsaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

6Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci mūlagandhā kāḷānusārigandho tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

7Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci sāragandhā, lohitacandanaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

8Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci pupphagandhā, vassikaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

9Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci kuṭṭarājāno, sabbete rañño cakkavattissa anuyantā bhavanti, rājā tesaṁ cakkavatti aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

10Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yā kāci tārakarūpānaṁ pabhā, sabbā tā candimappabhāya kalaṁ nāgghanti soḷasiṁ, candappabhā tāsaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

11Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, saradasamaye viddhe vigatavalāhake deve ādicco nataṁ abbhussakkamāno, sabbaṁ ākāsagataṁ tamagataṁ abhivihacca bhāsate ca tapate ca virocate ca; evameva kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabbaṁ kāmarāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ rūparāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ bhavarāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ avijjāṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati.

12Kathaṁ bhāvitā ca, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā kathaṁ bahulīkatā sabbaṁ kāmarāgaṁ pariyādiyati … pe … sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanati? ‘Iti rūpaṁ, iti rūpassa samudayo, iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo; iti vedanā … iti saññā … iti saṅkhārā … iti viññāṇaṁ, iti viññāṇassa samudayo, iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamo’ti –

evaṁ bhāvitā kho, bhikkhave, aniccasaññā evaṁ bahulīkatā sabbaṁ kāmarāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ rūparāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ bhavarāgaṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ avijjāṁ pariyādiyati, sabbaṁ asmimānaṁ samūhanatī"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Pupphavaggo pañcamo.

13Nadī pupphañca pheṇañca,  
gomayañca nakhāsikhaṁ;  
Suddhikaṁ dve ca gaddulā,  
vāsījaṭaṁ aniccatāti.

Majjhimapaṇṇāsako samatto.

14Upayo arahanto ca,  
khajjanī therasavhayaṁ;  
Pupphavaggena paṇṇāsa,  
dutiyo tena vuccatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.102-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA270]] | S iii 155 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA270]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN45:141-47.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.102]]
> ◄  [[sn22.101-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.103-sujato-pali]] ►
