---
sutta_code: "SN22.114"
sutta_title:
  - "Vijjāsutta "
  - "True Knowledge"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.114]]
> ◄  [[sn22.113-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.115-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XII. A Dhamma Speaker — SN22.114: Knowledge
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘knowledge’. What is knowledge? And how is a knowledgeable person defined?”

“bhikkhu, it’s when an educated noble disciple understands form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They understand feeling … perception … choices … consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is defined.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"‘vijjā, vijjā’ti, bhante, vuccati. Katamā nu kho, bhante, vijjā; kittāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī"ti?

"Idha, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpaṁ pajānāti, rūpasamudayaṁ … rūpanirodhaṁ … rūpanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ pajānāti. vedanāṁ … saññaṁ … saṅkhāre pajānāti … pe … viññāṇanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ pajānāti.

Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhu, vijjā; ettāvatā ca vijjāgato hotī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.114-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 162 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.114]]
> ◄  [[sn22.113-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.115-sujato-pali]] ►
