---
sutta_code: "SN22.23"
sutta_title:
  - "pariññāsutta "
  - "Full Understanding"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.23]]
> ◄  [[sn22.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.24-sujato-pali]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### III. The Burden — SN22.23: Complete Understanding
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the things that should be completely understood, and complete understanding. Listen …

And what things should be completely understood? Form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. These are called the things that should be completely understood.

And what is complete understanding? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is called complete understanding.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Pariññeyye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi pariññañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, pariññeyyā dhammā? Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, pariññeyyo dhammo, vedanā pariññeyyo dhammo, saññā pariññeyyo dhammo, saṅkhārā pariññeyyo dhammo, viññāṇaṁ pariññeyyo dhammo. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, pariññeyyā dhammā.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, pariññā? Yo, bhikkhave, rāgakkhayo dosakkhayo mohakkhayo. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, pariññā”ti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA72]] | S iii 26 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA72]], [[SN22.106]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN47.38.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.23]]
> ◄  [[sn22.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.24-sujato-pali]] ►
