---
sutta_code: "SN22.104"
sutta_title:
  - "Dukkhasutta "
  - "Suffering"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.104]]
> ◄  [[sn22.103-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.105-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XI. Sides — SN22.104: Suffering
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. Listen …

And what is suffering? It should be said: the five grasping aggregates. What five? That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is called suffering.

And what is the origin of suffering? It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, looking for enjoyment anywhere it can. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. This is called the origin of suffering.

And what is the cessation of suffering? It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not adhering to it. This is called the cessation of suffering.

And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Dukkhañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi dukkhasamudayañca dukkhanirodhañca dukkhanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadāṁ. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ? Pañcupādānakkhandhātissa vacanīyaṁ. Katame pañca? Seyyathidaṁ – rūpupādānakkhandho … pe … viññāṇupādānakkhandho. Idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, dukkhasamudayo? Yāyaṁ taṇhā ponobhavikā … pe … vibhavataṇhā – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhasamudayo.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodho? Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodho cāgo paṭinissaggo mutti anālayo – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodho.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo. Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā"ti.


Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.104-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 158 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.104]]
> ◄  [[sn22.103-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.105-sujato-pali]] ►
