---
sutta_code: "SN22.15"
sutta_title:
  - "Yadaniccasutta "
  - "What is Impermanent"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.15]]
> ◄  [[sn22.14-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.16-sujato-pali]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### II. Impermanence — SN22.15: That Which is Impermanent
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, form is impermanent. What’s impermanent is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’


Feeling is impermanent …


Perception is impermanent …


Choices are impermanent …


Consciousness is impermanent. What’s impermanent is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ; yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.


Vedanā aniccā. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ; yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.


Saññā aniccā … pe …


saṅkhārā aniccā …


viññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ; yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.15-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA10]], [[SA9]] | S iii 22 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA10]], [[SA9]], [[SN22.16]], [[SN22.17]], [[MN35]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.15]]
> ◄  [[sn22.14-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.16-sujato-pali]] ►
