---
sutta_code: "SN22.120"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṁyojaniyasutta "
  - "Things That Fetter"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.120]]
> ◄  [[sn22.119-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.121-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XII. A Dhamma Speaker — SN22.120: Things Prone To Being Fettered
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the things that are prone to being fettered, and the fetter. Listen …

What are the things that are prone to being fettered? And what is the fetter? Form is something that’s prone to being fettered. The desire and greed for it is the fetter. Feeling … Perception … Choices … Consciousness is something that’s prone to being fettered. The desire and greed for it is the fetter.

These are called the things that are prone to being fettered, and this is the fetter.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Saṁyojaniye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi saṁyojanañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyā dhammā, katamaṁ saṁyojanaṁ? Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyo dhammo; yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha saṁyojanaṁ. Vedanā … pe … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ saṁyojaniyo dhammo; yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha saṁyojanaṁ.

Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyā dhammā, idaṁ saṁyojanan"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.120-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 166 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.120]]
> ◄  [[sn22.119-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.121-sujato-pali]] ►
