---
sutta_code: "SN22.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Nandasutta "
  - "Nanda"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.8]]
> ◄  [[sn22.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.9-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### I. Nakula’s Father — SN22.8: Anxiety Because of Grasping (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you how grasping leads to anxiety, and how not grasping leads to freedom from anxiety. Listen and pay close attention, I will speak. And how does grasping lead to anxiety? It’s when an uneducated ordinary person regards form like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self.’ But that form of theirs decays and perishes, which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They regard feeling … perception … choices … consciousness like this: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self.’ But that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. That’s how grasping leads to anxiety.

And how does not grasping lead to freedom from anxiety? It’s when an educated noble disciple regards form like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ When that form of theirs decays and perishes, it doesn’t give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They regard feeling … perception … choices … consciousness like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ When that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, it doesn’t give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. That’s how not grasping leads to freedom from anxiety.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Upādāparitassanañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi anupādāaparitassanañca.

Taṁ suṇātha … pe … kathañca, bhikkhave, upādāparitassanā hoti? Idha, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano rūpaṁ ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassati. Tassa taṁ rūpaṁ vipariṇamati aññathā hoti. Tassa rūpavipariṇāmaññathābhāvā uppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā.

vedanāṁ etaṁ mama … pe … saññaṁ etaṁ mama … saṅkhāre etaṁ mama … viññāṇaṁ ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti samanupassati. Tassa taṁ viññāṇaṁ vipariṇamati aññathā hoti. Tassa viññāṇavipariṇāmaññathābhāvā uppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, upādāparitassanā hoti.

2Kathañca, bhikkhave, anupādāaparitassanā hoti? Idha, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpaṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassati. Tassa taṁ rūpaṁ vipariṇamati aññathā hoti. Tassa rūpavipariṇāmaññathābhāvā nuppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā.

vedanāṁ netaṁ mama … saññaṁ netaṁ mama … saṅkhāre netaṁ mama … viññāṇaṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassati. Tassa taṁ viññāṇaṁ vipariṇamati aññathā hoti. Tassa viññāṇavipariṇāmaññathābhāvā nuppajjanti sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, anupādāaparitassanā hotī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA44]] | S iii 18 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA44]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.8]]
> ◄  [[sn22.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.9-sujato-pali]] ►
