---
sutta_code: "SN22.117"
sutta_title:
  - "Bandhanasutta "
  - "Bondage"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.117]]
> ◄  [[sn22.116-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.118-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XII. A Dhamma Speaker — SN22.117: Shackles
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, take an uneducated ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the good persons. They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. They’re called an uneducated ordinary person who is bound to form, inside and out. They see neither the near shore nor the far shore. They’re born in bonds and die in bonds, and in bonds they go from this world to the next.

They regard feeling … perception … choices … consciousness as self. They’re called an uneducated ordinary person who is bound to consciousness, inside and out. They see neither the near shore nor the far shore. They’re born in bonds and die in bonds, and in bonds they go from this world to the next.

2An educated noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons. They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. They’re called an educated noble disciple who is not bound to form, inside or out. They see the near shore and the far shore. They’re exempt from suffering, I say.

They don’t regard feeling … perception … choices … consciousness as self. They’re called an educated noble disciple who is not bound to consciousness, inside or out. They see the near shore and the far shore. They’re exempt from suffering, I say.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Idha, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṁ adassāvī … pe … sappurisadhamme avinīto rūpaṁ attato samanupassati, rūpavantaṁ vā attānaṁ; attani vā rūpaṁ, rūpasmiṁ vā attānaṁ. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano rūpabandhanabaddho santarabāhirabandhanabaddho atīradassī apāradassī, baddho jīyati baddho mīyati baddho asmā lokā paraṁ lokaṁ gacchati.

vedanāṁ attato samanupassati … pe … vedanāya vā attānaṁ. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano vedanābandhanabaddho santarabāhirabandhanabaddho atīradassī apāradassī, baddho jīyati baddho mīyati baddho asmā lokā paraṁ lokaṁ gacchati. Saññaṁ … saṅkhāre … viññāṇaṁ attato samanupassati … pe … ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano viññāṇabandhanabaddho santarabāhirabandhanabaddho atīradassī apāradassī, baddho jīyati baddho mīyati baddho asmā lokā paraṁ lokaṁ gacchati.

2Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako ariyānaṁ dassāvī … pe … sappurisadhamme suvinīto na rūpaṁ attato samanupassati, na rūpavantaṁ vā attānaṁ; na attani vā rūpaṁ, na rūpasmiṁ vā attānaṁ. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako na rūpabandhanabaddho, na santarabāhirabandhanabaddho, tīradassī, pāradassī; ‘parimutto so dukkhasmā’ti vadāmi.

Na vedanāṁ attato … pe … na saññaṁ attato … pe … na saṅkhāre attato … pe … na viññāṇaṁ attato samanupassati … pe … ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako na viññāṇabandhanabaddho, na santarabāhirabandhanabaddho, tīradassī, pāradassī, ‘parimutto so dukkhasmā’ti vadāmī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.117-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA74]] | S iii 164 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA74]], [[SN22.65]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.117]]
> ◄  [[sn22.116-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.118-sujato-pali]] ►
