---
sutta_code: "SN22.76"
sutta_title:
  - "Arahantasutta "
  - "Arahants (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.76]]
> ◄  [[sn22.75-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.77-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### VIII. Itchy — SN22.76: The Perfected Ones
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, form is impermanent. What’s impermanent is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

Feeling … Perception … Choices … Consciousness is impermanent. What’s impermanent is suffering. What’s suffering is not-self. And what’s not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

2Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’ As far as there are abodes of sentient beings, even up until the pinnacle of existence, the perfected ones are the foremost and the best.”

3That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

4“Oh! How happy are the perfected ones!  
Craving is not found in them,  
the conceit ‘I am’ is cut off,  
and the net of delusion is shattered.

5They’ve attained imperturbability,  
their minds are unclouded,  
nothing in the world clings to them,  
they’ve become holy, undefiled.

6Completely understanding the five aggregates,  
their domain is the seven good qualities.  
Those good people are praiseworthy,  
the Buddha’s rightful children.

7Endowed with the seven gems,  
and trained in the three trainings,  
the great heroes live on,  
with fear and dread given up.

8Endowed with ten factors,  
those giants have immersion.  
These are the best in the world,  
craving is not found in them.

9The master’s knowledge has arisen:  
‘This bag of bones is my last.’  
They are independent of others  
in the core of the spiritual path.

10Unwavering in the face of discrimination,  
they’re freed from future lives.  
They’ve reached the level of the tamed,  
in the world, they’re the winners.

11Above, below, and all around,  
relishing is not found in them.  
They roar their lion’s roar:  
‘The awakened are supreme in the world!’”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Rūpaṁ, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ; yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.

Vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ; yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadanattā; yadanattā taṁ ‘netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṁ.

2Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpasmimpi nibbindati, vedanāyapi … saññāyapi … saṅkhāresupi … viññāṇasmimpi nibbindati. Nibbindaṁ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati. Vimuttasmiṁ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṁ hoti.

‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. Yāvatā, bhikkhave, sattāvāsā, yāvatā bhavaggaṁ, ete aggā, ete seṭṭhā lokasmiṁ yadidaṁ arahanto"ti.

3Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 

4"Sukhino vata arahanto,  
taṇhā tesaṁ na vijjati;  
Asmimāno samucchinno,  
mohajālaṁ padālitaṁ.

5Anejaṁ te anuppattā,  
cittaṁ tesaṁ anāvilaṁ;  
Loke anupalittā te,  
brahmabhūtā anāsavā.

6Pañcakkhandhe pariññāya,  
satta saddhammagocarā;  
Pasaṁsiyā sappurisā,  
puttā buddhassa orasā.

7Sattaratanasampannā,  
Tīsu sikkhāsu sikkhitā;  
Anuvicaranti mahāvīrā,  
Pahīnabhayabheravā.

8Dasahaṅgehi sampannā,  
mahānāgā samāhitā;  
Ete kho seṭṭhā lokasmiṁ,  
taṇhā tesaṁ na vijjati.

9Asekhañāṇamuppannaṁ,  
antimoyaṁ samussayo;  
Yo sāro brahmacariyassa,  
tasmiṁ aparapaccayā.

10Vidhāsu na vikampanti,  
vippamuttā punabbhavā;  
Dantabhūmimanuppattā,  
te loke vijitāvino.

11Uddhaṁ tiriyaṁ apācīnaṁ,  
nandī tesaṁ na vijjati;  
Nadanti te sīhanādaṁ,  
buddhā loke anuttarā"ti.


Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.76-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA120]] | S iii 82 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA120]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.76]]
> ◄  [[sn22.75-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.77-sujato-pali]] ►
