---
sutta_code: "SN22.105"
sutta_title:
  - "Sakkāyasutta "
  - "Identity"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.105]]
> ◄  [[sn22.104-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.106-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XI. Sides — SN22.105: Identity
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you identity, the origin of identity, the cessation of identity, and the practice that leads to the cessation of identity. Listen …

And what is identity? It should be said: the five grasping aggregates. What five? That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is called identity.


And what is the origin of identity? It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, looking for enjoyment anywhere it can. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. This is called the origin of identity.

And what is the cessation of identity? It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it. This is called the cessation of identity.

And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of identity? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of identity.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Sakkāyañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi sakkāyasamudayañca sakkāyanirodhañca sakkāyanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadāṁ. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyo? Pañcupādānakkhandhātissa vacanīyaṁ. Katame pañca? Seyyathidaṁ – rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyo.


Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayo? Yāyaṁ taṇhā ponobhavikā … pe … ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayo.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodho? Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya … pe … ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodho.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo. Seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminī paṭipadā"ti.


Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.105-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA46.2]], [[SA71]] | S iii 159 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.20]], [[EA46.2]], [[SA71]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.105]]
> ◄  [[sn22.104-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.106-sujato-pali]] ►
