---
sutta_code: "SN22.69"
sutta_title:
  - "Anattaniyasutta "
  - "What Does Not Belong to Self"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.69]]
> ◄  [[sn22.68-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.70-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### VIi. The Perfected Ones — SN22.69: Not Belonging to Self
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha … and asked him: “Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.”

“bhikkhu, give up desire for anything that doesn’t belong to self.”

“Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!”

2“But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?”

“Sir, form doesn’t belong to self; I should give up desire for it. Feeling … Perception … Choices … Consciousness doesn’t belong to self; I should give up desire for it.

That’s how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement.”

“Good, good, bhikkhu! It’s good that you understand the detailed meaning of what I’ve said in brief like this.

Form doesn’t belong to self; you should give up desire for it. Feeling … Perception … Choices … Consciousness doesn’t belong to self; you should give up desire for it.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief.” …

And that bhikkhu became one of the perfected.


#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṁ desetu … pe … vihareyyan"ti.

"Yaṁ kho, bhikkhu, anattaniyaṁ; tatra te chando pahātabbo"ti.

"Aññātaṁ, bhagavā, aññātaṁ, sugatā"ti.

2"Yathā kathaṁ pana tvaṁ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṁ ājānāsī"ti?

"Rūpaṁ kho, bhante, anattaniyaṁ; tatra me chando pahātabbo. Vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ anattaniyaṁ; tatra me chando pahātabbo.

Imassa khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṁ vitthārena atthaṁ ājānāmī"ti.

3"Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. Sādhu kho tvaṁ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṁ ājānāsi.

Rūpaṁ kho, bhikkhu, anattaniyaṁ; tatra te chando pahātabbo. Vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ anattaniyaṁ; tatra te chando pahātabbo.

Imassa kho, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṁ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo"ti … pe …

aññataro ca pana so bhikkhu arahataṁ ahosīti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.69-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA18]] | S iii 78 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA18]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.69]]
> ◄  [[sn22.68-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.70-sujato-pali]] ►
