---
sutta_code: "SN22.30"
sutta_title:
  - "Up pāda sutta "
  - "Arising"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.30]]
> ◄  [[sn22.29-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.31-sujato-pali]] ►

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### III. The Burden — SN22.30: Arising
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of form is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death.

2The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of feeling … perception … choices … consciousness is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death.

3The cessation, settling, and ending of form is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.

4The cessation, settling, and ending of feeling … perception … choices … consciousness is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Yo, bhikkhave, rūpassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo rogānaṁ ṭhiti jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo.

2Yo vedanāya … pe … yo saññāya … pe … yo saṅkhārānaṁ … pe … yo viññāṇassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo rogānaṁ ṭhiti jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo.

3Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho rogānaṁ vūpasamo jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo.

4Yo vedanāya … pe … yo saññāya … yo saṅkhārānaṁ … yo viññāṇassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho rogānaṁ vūpasamo jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo”ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.30-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA78]] | S iii 31 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA78]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.17]], [[SN35.18]], [[SN35.19]], [[SN35.20]], [[SN35.21]], [[SN35.22]], [[SN14.31]], [[SN14.32]], [[SN14.33]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.30]]
> ◄  [[sn22.29-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.31-sujato-pali]] ►
