---
sutta_code: "SN22.48"
sutta_title:
  - "Khandhasutta "
  - "Aggregates"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.48]]
> ◄  [[sn22.47-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.49-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### V. Be Your Own Island — SN22.48: Aggregates
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you the five aggregates and the five grasping aggregates. Listen …

And what are the five aggregates?

Any kind of form at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of form.

Any kind of feeling at all …

Any kind of perception at all …

Any kind of choices at all …

Any kind of consciousness at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of consciousness.

These are called the five aggregates.

And what are the five grasping aggregates?

Any kind of form at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, which is accompanied by defilements and is prone to being grasped: this is called the aggregate of form connected with grasping.

Any kind of feeling at all …

Any kind of perception at all …

Any kind of choices at all …

Any kind of consciousness at all — past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, which is accompanied by defilements and is prone to being grasped: this is called the aggregate of consciousness connected with grasping.

These are called the five grasping aggregates.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Pañca, bhikkhave, khandhe desessāmi, pañcupādānakkhandhe ca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, pañcakkhandhā? Yaṁ kiñci, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṁ vā sukhumaṁ vā hīnaṁ vā paṇītaṁ vā yaṁ dūre santike vā, ayaṁ vuccati rūpakkhandho. Yā kāci vedanā … pe … yā kāci saññā … ye keci saṅkhārā atītānāgatapaccuppannā ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikā vā sukhumā vā … pe … ayaṁ vuccati saṅkhārakkhandho. Yaṁ kiñci viññāṇaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṁ vā sukhumaṁ vā hīnaṁ vā paṇītaṁ vā yaṁ dūre santike vā, ayaṁ vuccati viññāṇakkhandho. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, pañcakkhandhā.

2Katame ca, bhikkhave, pañcupādānakkhandhā? Yaṁ kiñci, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ … pe … yaṁ dūre santike vā sāsavaṁ upādāniyaṁ, ayaṁ vuccati rūpupādānakkhandho. Yā kāci vedanā … pe … yā dūre santike vā sāsavā upādāniyā, ayaṁ vuccati vedanupādānakkhandho. Yā kāci saññā … pe … yā dūre santike vā sāsavā upādāniyā, ayaṁ vuccati saññupādānakkhandho. Ye keci saṅkhārā … pe … sāsavā upādāniyā, ayaṁ vuccati saṅkhārupādānakkhandho. Yaṁ kiñci viññāṇaṁ atītānāgatapaccuppannaṁ … pe … yaṁ dūre santike vā sāsavaṁ upādāniyaṁ, ayaṁ vuccati viññāṇupādānakkhandho. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, pañcupādānakkhandhā"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.48-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA55]] | S iii 47 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA55]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.48]]
> ◄  [[sn22.47-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.49-sujato-pali]] ►
