---
sutta_code: "SN22.152"
sutta_title:
  - "Soattāsutta "
  - "The Self"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.152]]
> ◄  [[sn22.151-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.153-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 22. Khandhasaṁyutta: On the Aggregates

### XV. Views — SN22.152: This Is My Self
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on what, does the view arise: ‘The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After passing away I will be permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable’?”

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

“When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the view arises: ‘The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After passing away I will be permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.’ When feeling … perception … choices … consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises: ‘The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After passing away I will be permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.’

2What do you think, bhikkhus? Is form permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, sir.”

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

“Suffering, sir.”

“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would the view arise: ‘The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After passing away I will be permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable’?”

“No, sir.”

“Is feeling … perception … choices … consciousness permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, sir.”

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

“Suffering, sir.”

“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would the view arise: ‘The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After passing away I will be permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable’?”

“No, sir.”

“Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Kismiṁ nu kho, bhikkhave, sati, kiṁ upādāya, kiṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘so attā, so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’"ti?

Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā … pe … .

"Rūpe kho, bhikkhave, sati, rūpaṁ upādāya, rūpaṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘so attā, so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’ti. Vedanāya … pe … saññāya … saṅkhāresu … pe … viññāṇe sati, viññāṇaṁ upādāya, viññāṇaṁ abhinivissa evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjati: ‘so attā, so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’ti.

2Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, rūpaṁ niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?

"Aniccaṁ, bhante".

"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vā taṁ sukhaṁ vā"ti?

"Dukkhaṁ, bhante".

"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ, api nu taṁ anupādāya evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: ‘so attā, so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’"ti?

"No hetaṁ, bhante".

"Vedanā … saññā … saṅkhārā … viññāṇaṁ niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?

"Aniccaṁ, bhante".

"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vā taṁ sukhaṁ vā"ti?

"Dukkhaṁ, bhante".

"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ, api nu taṁ anupādāya evaṁ diṭṭhi uppajjeyya: ‘so attā so loko, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo’"ti?

"No hetaṁ, bhante".

"Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyāti pajānātī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.152-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA152]] | S iii 182 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA152]], [[SN24.3]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DN1]], [[MN1]], [[SN24:5.22:81]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.152]]
> ◄  [[sn22.151-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.153-sujato-pali]] ►
