---
sutta_code: "SN11.14"
sutta_title:
  - "Daliddasutta "
  - "Poor"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.14]]
> ◄  [[sn11.5-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn11.15-thanissaro]] ►

## SN11.14 Poor

## ## Daḷidda Sutta


On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Forest, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. There he addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus!”

“Yes, lord,” the bhikkhus responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said, “bhikkhus, once there was a man living in this very Rājagaha—a poor, pitiful wretch of a person.[1](#sn11.14note01) He undertook conviction in the Dhamma & Vinaya proclaimed by the Blessed One, undertook virtue, undertook learning, undertook relinquishment, undertook discernment. He—having undertaken conviction in the Dhamma & Vinaya proclaimed by the Blessed One, having undertaken virtue, having undertaken learning, having undertaken relinquishment, having undertaken discernment—on the breakup of the body, after death, reappeared in a good destination, a heavenly world, in the company of the devas of the Thirty-three. There he outshone the other devas in beauty & in rank.

“Then the devas of the Thirty-three were indignant, annoyed, & complained: ‘Isn’t it amazing, good sirs! Isn’t it astounding! Before, this young deva, when he was a human being, was a poor, pitiful wretch of a person. But now, with the breakup of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a good destination, a heavenly world, in the company of the devas of the Thirty-three. There he outshines the other devas in beauty & in rank.’

“Then Sakka the deva-king addressed the devas of the Thirty-three, ‘Dear sirs, don’t be indignant with this young deva. Before, this young deva, when he was a human being, undertook conviction in the Dhamma & Vinaya proclaimed by the Blessed One, undertook virtue, undertook learning, undertook relinquishment, undertook discernment. He—having undertaken conviction in the Dhamma & Vinaya proclaimed by the Blessed One, having undertaken virtue, having undertaken learning, having undertaken relinquishment, having undertaken discernment—on the breakup of the body, after death, has reappeared in a good destination, a heavenly world, in the company of the devas of the Thirty-three. There he outshines the other devas in beauty & in rank.’

“Then, conciliating the devas of the Thirty-three, Sakka the deva-king on that occasion recited these verses:

‘One whose conviction in the Tathāgata

is well-established, unshakable;

whose virtue is admirable,

appealing to the noble ones, praised;

who has confidence in the Saṅgha,

& vision made straight:

“Not poor,” they say of him.

Not in vain his life.

So conviction & virtue,

confidence & Dhamma-vision

should be cultivated by the intelligent,

remembering the Buddhas’ teachings.’”[2](#sn11.14note02)

Notes

1. The Commentary confirms that this is a reference to the story of Suppabuddha the leper, recounted in [[ud5.3-thanissaro]].

2. These verses also appear in [[sn55.26-thanissaro]]. In Thailand, they are often chanted in ceremonies for dedicating merit to those who have passed away.

See also: [[sn3.21-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/thag-thanissaro-notes-fixed-FLAT/thag12-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn11.14-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.51]], [[SA1223]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.51]], [[SA1223]], [[AN4.52]], [[AN5.47]], [[SN55.26]], [[THAG8]].2, [[PE3]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN55.1]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.14]]
> ◄  [[sn11.5-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn11.15-thanissaro]] ►
