---
sutta_code: "SN40.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyajhanapañhāsutta "
  - "The Second jhāna"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN40]]  / 🌐 [[SN40.2]]
> ◄  [[sn40.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn40.3-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 40. Moggallānasaṁyutta: With Moggallāna

### I. By Moggallāna — SN40.2: A Question About the Second jhāna
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“They speak of this thing called the 'second jhāna'. What is the second jhāna?”

It occurred to me: ‘As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second jhāna, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and confidence, and unified mind, without thinking and considering. This is called the second jhāna.’

And so … I was entering and remaining in the second jhāna. While I was in that meditation, perceptions and attentions accompanied by placing the mind beset me.


2Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, ‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! Don’t neglect the second jhāna, brahmin! Settle your mind in the second jhāna; unify your mind and immerse it in the second jhāna.’

And so, after some time … I entered and remained in the second jhāna.

So if anyone should be rightly called a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.”

1"‘Dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ, dutiyaṁ jhanan’ti vuccati. Katamaṁ nu kho dutiyaṁ jhananti?

Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, etadahosi: ‘idha bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Idaṁ vuccati dutiyaṁ jhanan’ti.

So khvāhaṁ, āvuso, vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja viharāmi. Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, iminā vihārena vihārato vitakkasahagatā saññāmanasikārā samudācaranti.


2Atha kho maṁ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca: ‘moggallāna, moggallāna. Mā, brāhmaṇa, dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ pamādo, dutiye jhāne cittaṁ saṇṭhapehi, dutiye jhāne cittaṁ ekodiṁ karohi, dutiye jhāne cittaṁ samādahā’ti.

So khvāhaṁ, āvuso, aparena samayena vitakkavicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodibhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pītisukhaṁ dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ upasampajja vihāsiṁ.

Yañhi taṁ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya: ‘satthārānuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṁ patto’ti, mamaṁ taṁ sammā vadamāno vadeyya: ‘satthārānuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṁ patto’"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn40.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 263 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN40]]  / 🌐 [[SN40.2]]
> ◄  [[sn40.1-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn40.3-sujato-pali]] ►
