---
sutta_code: "SN40.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanapañhāsutta "
  - "The Base of Neither-Perception-Nor-Nonperception"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN40]]  / 🌐 [[SN40.8]]
> ◄  [[sn40.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn40.9-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 40. Moggallānasaṁyutta: With Moggallāna

### I. By Moggallāna — SN40.8: A Question About the Dimension of Neither Perception Nor Non-Perception
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“They speak of this thing called the ‘dimension of neither perception nor non-perception’. What is the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception?

It occurred to me: ‘It’s when a bhikkhu, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is called the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’

And so … I was entering and remaining in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. While I was in that meditation, perceptions and attentions accompanied by the dimension of nothingness beset me.


2Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, ‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! Don’t neglect the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, brahmin! Settle your mind in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception; unify your mind and immerse it in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’

And so, after some time … I entered and remained in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.

So if anyone should be rightly called a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.”

1"‘Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanan’ti vuccati. Katamaṁ nu kho nevasaññānāsaññāyatananti?

Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, etadahosi: ‘idha bhikkhu sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ upasampajja vihārati. Idaṁ vuccati nevasaññānāsaññāyatanan’ti.

So khvāhaṁ, āvuso, sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ upasampajja viharāmi. Tassa mayhaṁ, āvuso, iminā vihārena vihārato ākiñcaññāyatanasahagatā saññāmanasikārā samudācaranti.


2Atha kho maṁ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca: ‘moggallāna, moggallāna. Mā, brāhmaṇa, nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ pamādo, nevasaññānāsaññāyatane cittaṁ saṇṭhapehi, nevasaññānāsaññāyatane cittaṁ ekodiṁ karohi, nevasaññānāsaññāyatane cittaṁ samādahā’ti.

So khvāhaṁ, āvuso, aparena samayena sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ upasampajja vihāsiṁ.

Yañhi taṁ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya … pe … mahābhiññataṁ patto"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn40.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 268 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN40]]  / 🌐 [[SN40.8]]
> ◄  [[sn40.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn40.9-sujato-pali]] ►
