---
nikaya:
  - "SA"
  - "Saṃyukta Āgama"
contribution:
  - index
---
#  SA - Saṃyukta Āgama

### SA12 - 12 - T99
> [!example]- 🌐[[SA704]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa704-) - SA 12.1 – ? 
>  Frequently focusing on things tends to promote similar qualities, whether good (awakening factors) or bad (hindrances).

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA705]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa705-) - SA 12.2 – ? 
>  Skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and proper attention  which promotes the awakening factors

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA706]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa706-) - SA 12.3 – ? 
>  Hindrances sully the mind like impurities in gold or as some large trees with small seeds will overgrow and ruin other trees

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA707]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa707-) - SA 12.4 – ? 
>  Hindrances sully the mind like impurities in gold or as some large trees with small seeds will overgrow and ruin other trees

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA708]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa708-) - SA 12.5 – ? 
>  Skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and proper attention  which promotes the awakening factors

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA709]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa709-) - SA 12.6 – ? 
>  Listening to the teaching, the hindrances are given up and the awakening factors developed.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA710]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa710-) - SA 12.7 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA711]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa711-) - SA 12.8 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA712]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa712-) - SA 12.9 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA713]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa713-) - SA 12.10 – ? 
>  Some wanderers tell some buddhist bhikkhus that they, too, teach the five hindrances and the seven awakening factors, so what is the difference? The Buddha  explains by giving a detailed analytical treatment that he says is beyond the scope of the wanderers.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA714]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa714-) - SA 12.11 – ? 
>  The right and wrong ways to respond to sluggishness or restlessness.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA715]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa715-) - SA 12.12 – ? 
>  Just as the body depends on food, the awakening factors depend on nutriment. The Buddha  gives specific conditions for each of the factors

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA716]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa716-) - SA 12.13 – ? 
>  Venerable udāyı̄ celebrates his progress on the path, gaining faith as a householder, going forth, and realizing the dhamma. Now he develops the awakening factors for the end of suffering

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA717]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa717-) - SA 12.14 – ? 
>  As the dawn precedes the sunrise, so too good friendship and proper attention  precedes the awakening factors

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA718]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa718-) - SA 12.15 – ? 
>  The various awakening factors can be donned at different times of the day, like a man who puts on bright colored clothes whenever he wants

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA719]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa719-) - SA 12.16 – ? 
>  The awakening factors lead to extinguishment, like rafters holding up the roof peak, only arise when a Buddha  appears

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA720]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa720-) - SA 12.17 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA721]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa721-) - SA 12.18 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA722]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa722-) - SA 12.19 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA723]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa723-) - SA 12.20 – Junior Monks 
>  Here the awakening factors are described in the context of hearing the teachings and reflecting on them. This leads to full enlightenment, or at least to some lesser attainment

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA724]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa724-) - SA 12.21 – Fruitful Monks 
>  Here the awakening factors are described in the context of hearing the teachings and reflecting on them. This leads to full enlightenment, or at least to some lesser attainment

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA725]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa725-) - SA 12.22 – ? 
>  Success in meditation depends upon laying skillful foundations, well grounded on good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA726]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa726-) - SA 12.23 – ? 
>  When Ānanda says that good friendship is half the spiritual path, the Buddha  rebukes him, saying that it is in fact the whole of the spiritual path. Based on good friendship, the eightfold path is fulfilled.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA727]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa727-) - SA 12.24 – ? 
>  When mahāKassapa and Moggallana  was sick, the Buddha  taught him the awakening factors, inspiring him to a swift recovery

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA728]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa728-) - SA 12.25 – ? 
>  The awakening factors lead from the near to the far shore. to disenchantment to awakening.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA729]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa729-) - SA 12.26 – ? 
>  Venerable udāyı̄ celebrates his progress on the path, gaining faith as a householder, going forth, and realizing the dhamma. Now he develops the awakening factors for the end of suffering

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA730]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa730-) - SA 12.27 – ? 
>  Anyone who abandons the three kinds of discrimination does so due to the awakening factors, is wise, prosperous and crush Māra’s army

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA731]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa731-) - SA 12.28 – ? 
>  The awakening factors lead to extinguishment, like rafters holding up the roof peak, only arise when a Buddha  appears

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA732]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa732-) - SA 12.29 – ? 
>  The awakening factors lead to extinguishment, like rafters holding up the roof peak, only arise when a Buddha  appears

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA733]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa733-) - SA 12.30 – A Certain Monk 
>  Here the awakening factors are described in the context of hearing the teachings and reflecting on them. This leads to full enlightenment, or at least to some lesser attainment

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA734]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa734-) - SA 12.31 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA735]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa735-) - SA 12.32 – ? 
>  One who has developed the five faculties fully is a perfected one. Developing them to a lesser degree, one reaches lesser attainments

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA736]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa736-) - SA 12.33 – Seven Fruits 
>  Here the awakening factors are described in the context of hearing the teachings and reflecting on them. This leads to full enlightenment, or at least to some lesser attainment

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA737]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa737-) - SA 12.34 – Abodes of Mindfulness 
>  Here the awakening factors are described in the context of hearing the teachings and reflecting on them. This leads to full enlightenment, or at least to some lesser attainment

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA738]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa738-) - SA 12.35 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA739]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa739-) - SA 12.36 – ? 
>  One who has developed the five faculties fully is a perfected one. Developing them to a lesser degree, one reaches lesser attainments

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA740]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa740-) - SA 12.37 – Seven Fruits 
>  Here the awakening factors are described in the context of hearing the teachings and reflecting on them. This leads to full enlightenment, or at least to some lesser attainment

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA741]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa741-) - SA 12.38 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA742]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa742-) - SA 12.39 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA743]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa743-) - SA 12.40 – ? 
>  The Buddha  explains the detailed connection between the Brahmā meditations and the awakening factors, which taken together lead to liberation.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA744]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa744-) - SA 12.41 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA745]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa745-) - SA 12.42-45 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA746]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa746-) - SA 12.46 – Ānāpānasmṛti 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA747]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa747-) - SA 12.47-67 – ? 
>  
