---
nikaya:
  - "SA"
  - "Saṃyukta Āgama"
contribution:
  - index
---
#  SA - Saṃyukta Āgama

### SA30 - 30 - T99
> [!example]- 🌐[[SA535]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa535-) - SA 30.1 – ? 
>  Anuruddha reflected that one who has neglected the four kinds of mindfulness meditation has neglected the path to the end of suffering. Moggallāna reads his mind and visits to question him on this. Anuruddha speaks of developing the four kinds of mindfulness meditation internally and externally, in terms of origin and cessation, and developing power over perceptions.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA536]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa536-) - SA 30.2 – ? 
>  Anuruddha reflected that one who has neglected the four kinds of mindfulness meditation has neglected the path to the end of suffering. Moggallāna reads his mind and visits to question him on this. Anuruddha speaks of developing the four kinds of mindfulness meditation internally and externally, in terms of origin and cessation, and developing power over perceptions.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA537]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa537-) - SA 30.3 – ? 
>  Sāriputta asks anuruddha what makes someone a trainee and an adept. It is someone who has  developed the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA538]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa538-) - SA 30.4 – ? 
>  Sāriputta asks anuruddha what makes someone a trainee and an adept. It is someone who has  developed the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA539]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa539-) - SA 30.5 – ? 
>  By developing the four kinds of mindfulness meditation anuruddha attained all psychic powers

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA540]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa540-) - SA 30.6 – ? 
>  Some bhikkhus ask anuruddha how he remains equanimous even though ill. He replies that it is due to the four kinds of mindfulness meditation

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA541]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa541-) - SA 30.7 – ? 
>  Some bhikkhus ask anuruddha how he remains equanimous even though ill. He replies that it is due to the four kinds of mindfulness meditation

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA542]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa542-) - SA 30.8 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA543]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa543-) - SA 30.9 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA544]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa544-) - SA 30.10 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA545]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa545-) - SA 30.11 – ? 
>  Even if kings beg them to disrobe, a bhikkhu who has developed the four kinds of mindfulness meditation is unmoved. Their mind flows to nibbāna like the ganges to the sea
