---
nikaya:
  - "SA"
  - "Saṃyukta Āgama"
contribution:
  - index
---
#  SA - Saṃyukta Āgama

### SA48 - 48 - T99
> [!example]- 🌐[[SA980]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa980-) - SA 48.1 – ? 
>  The rewards of giving are compared to fields of different qualities

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA981]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa981-) - SA 48.2 – ? 
>  When sakka, the lord of gods, tries to organize a counterattack against the demons, he is frustrated by his lazy general suvīra. Sakka asks suvīra how one might get what one wants without effort; but suvīra apparently believes sakka can grant any wish he wants. The Buddha  emphasizes that if effort is valuable among the gods, how much more so for bhikkhus.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA982]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa982-) - SA 48.3 – ? 
>  Could there be a state of convergence with no sense of self? Even the Buddha  found it hard to get students to understand

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA983]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa983-) - SA 48.4 – ? 
>  Could there be a state of convergence with no sense of self? Even the Buddha  found it hard to get students to understand

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA984]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa984-) - SA 48.5 – ? 
>  Could there be a state of convergence with no sense of self? Even the Buddha  found it hard to get students to understand

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA985]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa985-) - SA 48.6 – ? 
>  The opinions of our friends and enemies often influence our own thoughts and feelings about others. This kind of thinking is rooted in craving, and the Buddha  offers a cure

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA986]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa986-) - SA 48.7 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA987]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa987-) - SA 48.8 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA988]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa988-) - SA 48.9 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA989]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa989-) - SA 48.10 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA990]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa990-) - SA 48.11 – ? 
>  The female lay disciple migasālā questions Ānanda how the Buddha  could have declared her father and her uncle had the same level of spiritual attainment, when one was much more strict than the other. Ānanda conveys this to the Buddha , who responds that only such as he can pass judgment, since the spiritual faculties of individuals are complex and hard to understand

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA991]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa991-) - SA 48.12 – ? 
>  The female lay disciple migasālā questions Ānanda how the Buddha  could have declared her father and her uncle had the same level of spiritual attainment, when one was much more strict than the other. Ānanda conveys this to the Buddha , who responds that only such as he can pass judgment, since the spiritual faculties of individuals are complex and hard to understand

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA992]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa992-) - SA 48.13 – ? 
>  But in what way does master gotama teach action and inaction

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1241]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1241-) - SA 48.14 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1242]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1242-) - SA 48.15 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1243]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1243-) - SA 48.16 – ? 
>  Dark and bright qualities

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1244]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1244-) - SA 48.17 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1245]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1245-) - SA 48.18 – ? 
>  Hurting yourself and others
