---
nikaya:
  - "SA"
  - "Saṃyukta Āgama"
contribution:
  - index
---
#  SA - Saṃyukta Āgama

### SA49 - 49 - T99
> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1246]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1246-) - SA 49.1 – ? 
>  Hindrances sully the mind like impurities in gold or as some large trees with small seeds will overgrow and ruin other trees

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1247]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1247-) - SA 49.2 – ? 
>  Meditation is like purifying gold. A meditator should focus on different aspects at different times in order to proceed smoothly

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1248]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1248-) - SA 49.3 – ? 
>  Drawing parallels with a cowherd guiding his herd across a dangerous river, the Buddha  presents the various kinds of enlightened disciples who cross the stream of transmigration

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1249]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1249-) - SA 49.4 – ? 
>  A cowherd with eleven qualities is competent to look after a herd of cattle. Likelwise, a bhikkhu with eleven qualities can grow in the dhamma

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1250]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1250-) - SA 49.5 – ? 
>  The Buddha  tells venerable nāgita how he dislikes noisy crowds, and wishes never to become famous

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1251]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1251-) - SA 49.6 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1252]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1252-) - SA 49.7 – ? 
>  Be careful: there are many popular teachings nowadays that may sound good, but they're not necessarily consistent with the Buddha 's teachings

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1253]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1253-) - SA 49.8 – ? 
>  Love is more beneficial than generosity.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1254]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1254-) - SA 49.9 – ? 
>  As a family with few men and many women is easily attacked, non-human beings may attack a bhikkhu without love.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1255]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1255-) - SA 49.10 – ? 
>  Love is more beneficial than generosity.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1256]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1256-) - SA 49.11 – ? 
>  As the dirt in a fingernail is smaller than the great earth, the beings reborn as humans are few.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1257]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1257-) - SA 49.12 – ? 
>  As the dirt in a fingernail is smaller than the great earth, the beings reborn as humans are few.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1258]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1258-) - SA 49.13 – ? 
>  Be careful: there are many popular teachings nowadays that may sound good, but they're not necessarily consistent with the Buddha 's teachings

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1259]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1259-) - SA 49.14 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1260]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1260-) - SA 49.15 – ? 
>  A bhikkhu who overly associates with the laity is like an elephant calf who tries to copy the great bull elephants.

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1261]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1261-) - SA 49.16 – ? 
>  

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1262]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1262-) - SA 49.17 – ? 
>  An old jackal howls at dawn, but even they have more gratitude than some

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1263]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1263-) - SA 49.18 – ? 
>  Material possessions, honor, and praise are terrible things, obstructing spiritual progress

> [!example]- 🌐[[SA1264]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sa1264-) - SA 49.19 – ? 
>  Material possessions, honor, and praise are terrible things, obstructing spiritual progress
