---
sutta_code: "SN56.59"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamapabbatūpamasutta "
  - "The Mountain (1)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.59]]
> ◄  [[sn56.58-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.60-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### VI. Comprehension — SN56.59: A Mountain (1st)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, suppose a person was to place seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds on the Himalayas, the king of mountains.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds, or the Himalayas, the king of mountains?”

“Sir, the Himalayas, the king of mountains, is certainly more. The seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds are tiny. Compared to the Himalayas, they can’t be reckoned or compared, they’re not even a fraction.”

“In the same way, for a noble disciple … That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso himavato pabbatarājassa satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhipeyya.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ – yā vā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā, ayaṁ vā himavā pabbatarājā"ti?

"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ, yadidaṁ – himavā pabbatarājā; appamattikā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā. Saṅkhampi na upenti, upanidhampi na upenti, kalabhāgampi na upenti himavantaṁ pabbatarājānaṁ upanidhāya satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa … pe … yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.59-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA439]], [[SA441]] | S v 464 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA441]], [[SN13.5]], [[SN56.55]], [[SN13.9]], [[SN56.49]], [[SA439]], [[SN13.11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.59]]
> ◄  [[sn56.58-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.60-pali-sc]] ►
