---
sutta_code: "SN56.55"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamamahāpathavīsutta "
  - "The Earth (1)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.55]]
> ◄  [[sn56.54-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.56-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### VI. Comprehension — SN56.55: The Earth (1st)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, suppose a person was to place seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds on the great earth.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds, or the great earth?”

“Sir, the great earth is certainly more. The seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds are tiny. Compared to the great earth, they can’t be reckoned or compared, they’re not even a fraction.”

“In the same way, for a noble disciple … That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso mahāpathaviyā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā upanikkhipeyya.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ – yā vā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā upanikkhittā, ayaṁ vā mahāpathavī"ti?

"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ, yadidaṁ – mahāpathavī; appamattikā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā upanikkhittā. Saṅkhampi na upenti, upanidhampi na upenti, kalabhāgampi na upenti mahāpathaviṁ upanidhāya satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā upanikkhittā"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa … pe … yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.55-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA439]], [[SA441]] | S v 462 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA441]], [[SN13.5]], [[SN13.9]], [[SN56.59]], [[SN56.49]], [[SA439]], [[SN13.11]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN56:51-60AREPARALLELTO13:1-10]], [[AN]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.55]]
> ◄  [[sn56.54-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.56-pali-sc]] ►
