---
sutta_code: "SN56.15"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamadhāraṇasutta "
  - "Remembrance (1)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.15]]
> ◄  [[sn56.14-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.16-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### II. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma — SN56.15: Remembering (1st)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, do you remember the four noble truths that I taught?”

When he said this, one of the bhikkhus said to the Buddha:


“I do, sir.”

“How so, bhikkhu?”


“Sir, I remember that suffering is the first noble truth you’ve taught; the origin of suffering is the second; the cessation of suffering is the third; and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is the fourth. That’s how I remember the four noble truths as you’ve taught them.”


2“Good, good, bhikkhu! It’s good that you remember the four noble truths as I’ve taught them. Suffering is the first noble truth I’ve taught, and that’s how you should remember it. The origin of suffering is the second; the cessation of suffering is the third; and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is the fourth. That’s how you should remember the four noble truths as I’ve taught them.


3That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Dhāretha no tumhe, bhikkhave, mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī"ti?

Evaṁ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 


"Ahaṁ kho, bhante, dhāremi bhagavatā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī"ti.

"Yathā kathaṁ pana tvaṁ, bhikkhu, dhāresi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī"ti?


"Dukkhaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ dhāremi; dukkhasamudayaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā dutiyaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ dhāremi; dukkhanirodhaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā tatiyaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ dhāremi; dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ dhāremi. Evaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, dhāremi bhagavatā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī"ti.


2"Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. Sādhu kho tvaṁ, bhikkhu, dhāresi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānīti. Dukkhaṁ kho, bhikkhu, mayā paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ, tathā naṁ dhārehi; dukkhasamudayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, mayā dutiyaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ, tathā naṁ dhārehi; dukkhanirodhaṁ kho, bhikkhu, mayā tatiyaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ, tathā naṁ dhārehi; dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā kho, bhikkhu, mayā catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ, tathā naṁ dhārehi. Evaṁ kho, bhikkhu, dhārehi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānīti.


3Tasmātiha, bhikkhu, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.15-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA416]] | S v 426 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA416]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN141]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.15]]
> ◄  [[sn56.14-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.16-pali-sc]] ►
