---
sutta_code: "SN56.16"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyadhāraṇasutta "
  - "Remembrance (2)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.16]]
> ◄  [[sn56.15-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.17-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### II. Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma — SN56.16: Remembering (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, do you remember the four noble truths that I taught?”


When he said this, one of the bhikkhus said to the Buddha:

“I do, sir.”


2“How so, bhikkhu?”

“Sir, I remember that suffering is the first noble truth you’ve taught. For if any ascetic or brahmin should say this: ‘What the ascetic Gotama teaches is not the first noble truth of suffering. I’ll reject this first noble truth of suffering and describe another first noble truth of suffering.’ That is not possible.

The origin of suffering … The cessation of suffering … The practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is the fourth noble truth you’ve taught. For if any ascetic or brahmin should say this: ‘What the ascetic Gotama teaches is not the fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. I’ll reject this fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering and describe another fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’ That is not possible.


That’s how I remember the four noble truths as you’ve taught them.”

3“Good, good, bhikkhu! It’s good that you remember the four noble truths as I’ve taught them. Suffering is the first noble truth I’ve taught, and that’s how you should remember it. For if any ascetic or brahmin should say this: ‘What the ascetic Gotama teaches is not the first noble truth of suffering. I’ll reject this first noble truth of suffering and describe another first noble truth of suffering.’ That is not possible.

The origin of suffering … The cessation of suffering … The practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is the fourth noble truth I’ve taught, and that’s how you should remember it. For if any ascetic or brahmin should say this: ‘What the ascetic Gotama teaches is not the fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. I’ll reject this fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering and describe another fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’ That is not possible.

That’s how you should remember the four noble truths as I’ve taught them.


4That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Dhāretha no tumhe, bhikkhave, mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī"ti?


Evaṁ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"Ahaṁ kho, bhante, dhāremi bhagavatā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī"ti.


2"Yathā kathaṁ pana tvaṁ, bhikkhu, dhāresi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī"ti?

"Dukkhaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ dhāremi. Yo hi koci, bhante, samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā evaṁ vadeyya: ‘netaṁ dukkhaṁ paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ yaṁ samaṇena gotamena desitaṁ. Ahametaṁ dukkhaṁ paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ paccakkhāya aññaṁ dukkhaṁ paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ paññapessāmī’ti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.

Dukkhasamudayaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ dhāremi. Yo hi koci, bhante, samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā evaṁ vadeyya: ‘netaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ yaṁ samaṇena gotamena desitaṁ. Ahametaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ paccakkhāya aññaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ paññapessāmī’ti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.


Evaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, dhāremi bhagavatā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānī"ti.

3"Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. Sādhu kho tvaṁ, bhikkhu, dhāresi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānīti. Dukkhaṁ kho, bhikkhu, mayā paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ, tathā naṁ dhārehi. Yo hi koci, bhikkhu, samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā evaṁ vadeyya: ‘netaṁ dukkhaṁ paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ yaṁ samaṇena gotamena desitaṁ. Ahametaṁ dukkhaṁ paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ paccakkhāya aññaṁ dukkhaṁ paṭhamaṁ ariyasaccaṁ paññapessāmī’ti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.

Dukkhasamudayaṁ kho, bhikkhu … pe … dukkhanirodhaṁ kho, bhikkhu … pe … dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā kho, bhikkhu, mayā catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ desitaṁ, tathā naṁ dhārehi. Yo hi koci, bhikkhu, samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā evaṁ vadeyya: ‘netaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ yaṁ samaṇena gotamena desitaṁ. Ahametaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ paccakkhāya aññaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadāṁ catutthaṁ ariyasaccaṁ paññapessāmī’ti – netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.

Evaṁ kho tvaṁ, bhikkhu, dhārehi mayā cattāri ariyasaccāni desitānīti.


4Tasmātiha, bhikkhu, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.16-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA418]] | S v 427 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA418]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN141]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.16]]
> ◄  [[sn56.15-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.17-pali-sc]] ►
