---
sutta_code: "SN56.7"
sutta_title:
  - "Vitakkasutta "
  - "Thoughts"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.7]]
> ◄  [[sn56.6-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.8-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### I. Immersion — SN56.7: Thoughts
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, don’t think bad, unskillful thoughts, such as sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. Why is that? Because those thoughts aren’t beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. They don’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

2When you think, you should think: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. Why is that? Because those thoughts are beneficial and relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. They lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

3That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Mā, bhikkhave, pāpake akusale vitakke vitakkeyyātha, seyyathidaṁ – kāmavitakkaṁ, byā pāda vitakkaṁ, vihiṁsāvitakkaṁ. Taṁ kissa hetu? Nete, bhikkhave, vitakkā atthasaṁhitā nādibrahmacariyakā na nibbidāya na virāgāya na nirodhāya na upasamāya na abhiññāya na sambodhāya na nibbānāya saṁvattanti.

2Vitakkentā ca kho tumhe, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti vitakkeyyātha, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhasamudayo’ti vitakkeyyātha, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodho’ti vitakkeyyātha, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti vitakkeyyātha. Taṁ kissa hetu? Ete, bhikkhave, vitakkā atthasaṁhitā ete ādibrahmacariyakā ete nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya nibbānāya saṁvattanti.

3Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yogo karaṇīyo … pe … ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.7-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA409-410]] | S v 417 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA409-410]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.7]]
> ◄  [[sn56.6-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.8-pali-sc]] ►
