---
sutta_code: "SN56.54"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyasambhejjasutta "
  - "Water at the Confluence (2)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.54]]
> ◄  [[sn56.53-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.55-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### VI. Comprehension — SN56.54: Where the Waters Flow Together (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are places where the great rivers—the Ganges, Yamuna, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī—come together and converge. Suppose that water dried up and evaporated except for two or three drops.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated, or the two or three drops left?”

“Sir, the water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated is certainly more. The two or three drops left are tiny. Compared to the water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated, it can’t be reckoned or compared, it’s not even a fraction.”

“In the same way, for a noble disciple … That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yatthimā mahānadiyo saṁsandanti samenti, seyyathidaṁ – gaṅgā, yamunā, aciravatī, sarabhū, mahī, taṁ udakaṁ parikkhayaṁ pariyādānaṁ gaccheyya, ṭhapetvā dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ – yaṁ vā saṁbhejjaudakaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādinnaṁ, yāni dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhānī"ti?

"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ saṁbhejjaudakaṁ yadidaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādinnaṁ; appamattakāni dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhāni. Saṅkhampi na upenti, upanidhampi na upenti, kalabhāgampi na upenti saṁbhejjaudakaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādinnaṁ upanidhāya dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhānī"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa … pe … yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.54-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 461 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN13.4]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN56:51-60AREPARALLELTO13:1-10]], [[AN]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.54]]
> ◄  [[sn56.53-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.55-pali-sc]] ►
