---
sutta_code: "SN56.56"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyamahāpathavīsutta "
  - "The Earth (2)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.56]]
> ◄  [[sn56.55-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.57-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### VI. Comprehension — SN56.56: The Earth (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, suppose the great earth was worn away and eroded except for seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the great earth that has been worn away and eroded, or the seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds that are left?”

“Sir, the great earth that has been worn away and eroded is certainly more. The seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds are tiny. Compared to the great earth that has been worn away and eroded, they can’t be reckoned or compared, they’re not even a fraction.”

“In the same way, for a noble disciple … That’s why you should practice meditation …”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāpathavī parikkhayaṁ pariyādānaṁ gaccheyya ṭhapetvā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ – yaṁ vā mahāpathaviyā parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādinnaṁ, yā vā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā"ti?

"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ mahāpathaviyā yadidaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādinnaṁ; appamattikā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā. Saṅkhampi na upenti, upanidhampi na upenti, kalabhāgampi na upenti mahāpathaviyā parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādinnaṁ upanidhāya satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa … pe … yogo karaṇīyo"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.56-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 462 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN13.6]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN56:51-60AREPARALLELTO13:1-10]], [[AN]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.56]]
> ◄  [[sn56.55-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.57-pali-sc]] ►
