---
sutta_code: "SN56.22"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyakoṭigāmasutta "
  - "Koṭigama (2)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.22]]
> ◄  [[sn56.21-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.23-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 56. Saccasaṁyutta: On the Truths

### III. At the Village of Koṭi — SN56.22: At the Village of Koṭi (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. I don’t regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight.

2There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. I regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.”

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:


4“There are those who don’t understand suffering  
and suffering’s cause,  
and where all suffering  
ceases with nothing left over.

5And they don’t know the path  
that leads to the stilling of suffering.  
They lack the heart’s release,  
as well as the release by wisdom.  
Unable to make an end,  
they continue to be reborn and get old.

6But there are those who understand suffering  
and suffering’s cause,  
and where all suffering  
ceases with nothing left over.

7And they understand the path  
that leads to the stilling of suffering.  
They’re endowed with the heart’s release,  
as well as the release by wisdom.  
Able to make an end,  
they don’t continue to be reborn and get old.”

1"Ye hi keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṁ nappajānanti, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṁ nappajānanti, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṁ nappajānanti, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṁ nappajānanti, na me te, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu vā samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu vā brāhmaṇasammatā, na ca pana te āyasmanto sāmaññatthaṁ vā brahmaññatthaṁ vā diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāranti.

2Ye ca kho keci, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā ‘idaṁ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānanti, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānanti, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānanti, ‘Ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānanti, te kho me, bhikkhave, samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā samaṇesu ceva samaṇasammatā brāhmaṇesu ca brāhmaṇasammatā, te ca panāyasmanto sāmaññatthañca brahmaññatthañca diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihārantī"ti.

3Idamavoca bhagavā. Idaṁ vatvāna sugato athāparaṁ etadavoca satthā: 


4"Ye dukkhaṁ nappajānanti,  
atho dukkhassa sambhavaṁ;  
Yattha ca sabbaso dukkhaṁ,  
asesaṁ uparujjhati.

5Tañca maggaṁ na jānanti,  
Dukkhūpasamagāminaṁ;  
Cetovimuttihīnā te,  
Atho paññāvimuttiyā;  
Abhabbā te antakiriyāya,  
Te ve jātijarūpagā.

6Ye ca dukkhaṁ pajānanti,  
atho dukkhassa sambhavaṁ;  
Yattha ca sabbaso dukkhaṁ,  
asesaṁ uparujjhati.

7Tañca maggaṁ pajānanti,  
dukkhūpasamagāminaṁ;  
Cetovimuttisampannā,  
atho paññāvimuttiyā;  
Bhabbā te antakiriyāya,  
na te jātijarūpagā"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.22-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA390-392]] | S v 431 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA390-392]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.22]]
> ◄  [[sn56.21-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn56.23-pali-sc]] ►
