---
sutta_code: "AN11.21"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhi "
  - "Immersion"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.21]]
> ◄  [[an11.20-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

# AN 11.21 Catutthasamādhisuttaṃ

## AN 11.21 The Fourth Discourse on samādhi

21. Tatra kho āyasmā sāriputto bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘siyā nu kho, āvuso, bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa, na āpasmiṃ āposaññī assa, na tejasmiṃ tejosaññī assa, na vāyasmiṃ vāyosaññī assa, na ākāsānañcāyatane ākāsānañcāyatanasaññī assa, na viññāṇañcāyatane viññāṇañcāyatanasaññī assa, na ākiñcaññāyatane ākiñcaññāyatanasaññī assa, na nevasaññānāsaññāyatane nevasaññānāsaññāyatanasaññī assa, na idhaloke idhalokasaññī assa, na paraloke paralokasaññī assa, yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tatrāpi na saññī assa; saññī ca pana assā’’ti?

21.Then the Venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus: “Friends, could a bhikkhu have such an attainment of samādhi that he would be neither percipient of earth in earth, nor percipient of water in water, nor percipient of fire in fire, nor percipient of air in air; neither percipient of the base of infinite space in the base of infinite space, nor percipient of the base of infinite consciousness in the base of infinite consciousness, nor percipient of the base of nothingness in the base of nothingness, nor percipient of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; neither percipient of this world in this world, nor percipient of another world in another world; nor percipient of what has been seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought, and pondered by the mind, and yet he would be percipient?”

‘‘Dūratopi kho mayaṃ, āvuso, āgaccheyyāma āyasmato sāriputtassa santike etassa bhāsitassa atthamaññātuṃ. Sādhu vatāyasmantaṃyeva sāriputtaṃ paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Āyasmato sāriputtassa sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī’’ti.

“Friend, we would come even from afar to the Venerable Sāriputta’s presence to understand the meaning of this statement. It would be good indeed if the Venerable Sāriputta himself would clarify the meaning of this statement. Having heard it from the Venerable Sāriputta, the bhikkhus will remember it.”

‘‘Tenahāvuso, suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha; bhāsissāmī’’ti. ‘‘Evamāvuso’’ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato sāriputtassa paccassosuṃ. Āyasmā sāriputto etadavoca –

“Then, friends, listen and pay close attention; I will speak.” “Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied to the Venerable Sāriputta. The Venerable Sāriputta said this:

‘‘Siyā, āvuso bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa…pe… yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tatrāpi na saññī assa; saññī ca pana assā’’ti.

“Friends, a bhikkhu could have such an attainment of samādhi that he would not be percipient of earth in earth … nor percipient of what has been seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought, and pondered by the mind, and yet he would be percipient.”

‘‘Yathā kathaṃ panāvuso, siyā bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa…pe… yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tatrāpi na saññī assa; saññī ca pana assā’’ti?

“But how, friend, could a bhikkhu have such an attainment of samādhi that he would not be percipient of earth in earth … nor percipient of what has been seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought, and pondered by the mind, and yet he would be percipient?”

‘‘Idha, āvuso, bhikkhu evaṃsaññī hoti – ‘etaṃ santaṃ etaṃ paṇītaṃ, yadidaṃ sabbasaṅkhārasamatho sabbūpadhipaṭinissaggo taṇhākkhayo virāgo nirodho nibbāna’nti. Evaṃ kho, āvuso, siyā bhikkhuno tathārūpo samādhipaṭilābho yathā neva pathaviyaṃ pathavisaññī assa, na āpasmiṃ āposaññī assa, na tejasmiṃ tejosaññī assa, na vāyasmiṃ vāyosaññī assa, na ākāsānañcāyatane ākāsānañcāyatanasaññī assa, na viññāṇañcāyatane viññāṇañcāyatanasaññī assa, na ākiñcaññāyatane ākiñcaññāyatanasaññī assa, na nevasaññānāsaññāyatane nevasaññānāsaññāyatanasaññī assa, na idhaloke idhalokasaññī assa, na paraloke paralokasaññī assa, yampidaṃ diṭṭhaṃ sutaṃ mutaṃ viññātaṃ pattaṃ pariyesitaṃ anuvicaritaṃ manasā tatrāpi na saññī assa; saññī ca pana assā’’ti. Ekādasamaṃ.

“Here, friends, a bhikkhu is percipient thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all formations, the relinquishment of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna.’ In this way, friends, a bhikkhu could have such an attainment of samādhi that he would not be percipient of earth in earth, nor of water in water, nor of fire in fire, nor of air in air; nor of the base of infinite space in the base of infinite space, nor of the base of infinite consciousness in the base of infinite consciousness, nor of the base of nothingness in the base of nothingness, nor of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; nor of this world in this world, nor of another world in another world; nor percipient of what has been seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought, and pondered by the mind, and yet he would be percipient.” The eleventh.

Anussativaggo dutiyo.

The Second Chapter on Recollection.

Tassuddānaṃ –

The summary:

Dve vuttā mahānāmena, nandiyena subhūtinā;Mettā aṭṭhako gopālo, cattāro ca samādhināti.

Two with Mahānāma, then Nandiya and Subhūti; loving-kindness, the octad, and Gopāla, and four discourses on samādhi.

3. Sāmaññavaggo

3.The Chapter on Similes

22-29. ‘‘Ekādasahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgato gopālako abhabbo gogaṇaṃ pariharituṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ. Katamehi ekādasahi? Idha, bhikkhave, gopālako na rūpaññū hoti, na lakkhaṇakusalo hoti, na āsāṭikaṃ hāretā hoti, na vaṇaṃ paṭicchādetā hoti, na dhūmaṃ kattā hoti, na titthaṃ jānāti, na pītaṃ jānāti, na vīthiṃ jānāti, na gocarakusalo hoti, anavasesadohī ca hoti, ye te usabhā gopitaro gopariṇāyakā te na atirekapūjāya pūjetā hoti – imehi kho, bhikkhave, ekādasahi aṅgehi samannāgato gopālako abhabbo gogaṇaṃ pariharituṃ phātiṃ kātuṃ.

Bhikkhus, a cowherd endowed with eleven factors is incapable of maintaining and increasing a herd of cattle. What eleven? Here, bhikkhus, a cowherd is not discerning of form, is unskilled in signs, does not remove ticks, does not dress wounds, does not fumigate, does not know the ford, does not know what has been drunk, does not know the path, is unskilled in pasture lands, milks the cows dry, and does not honor with special attention the bulls that are the herd's sires and leaders. Bhikkhus, a cowherd endowed with these eleven factors is incapable of maintaining and increasing a herd of cattle.

‘‘Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ekādasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu abhabbo cakkhusmiṃ aniccānupassī viharituṃ…pe… abhabbo cakkhusmiṃ dukkhānupassī viharituṃ… abhabbo cakkhusmiṃ anattānupassī viharituṃ… abhabbo cakkhusmiṃ khayānupassī viharituṃ… abhabbo cakkhusmiṃ vayānupassī viharituṃ… abhabbo cakkhusmiṃ virāgānupassī viharituṃ… abhabbo cakkhusmiṃ nirodhānupassī viharituṃ… abhabbo cakkhusmiṃ paṭinissaggānupassī viharituṃ’’.

So too, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu endowed with eleven qualities is incapable of dwelling contemplating impermanence in the eye… incapable of dwelling contemplating suffering in the eye… incapable of dwelling contemplating not-self in the eye… incapable of dwelling contemplating destruction in the eye… incapable of dwelling contemplating vanishing in the eye… incapable of dwelling contemplating fading away in the eye… incapable of dwelling contemplating cessation in the eye… incapable of dwelling contemplating relinquishment in the eye.

30-69. …Sotasmiṃ… ghānasmiṃ… jivhāya… kāyasmiṃ… manasmiṃ….

…in the ear… in the nose… in the tongue… in the body… in the mind…

70-117. …Rūpesu… saddesu… gandhesu… rasesu… phoṭṭhabbesu… dhammesu….

...in forms... in sounds... in smells... in tastes... in tactile objects... in mental phenomena...

118-165. …Cakkhuviññāṇe… sotaviññāṇe… ghānaviññāṇe… jivhāviññāṇe… kāyaviññāṇe… manoviññāṇe….

...in eye-consciousness... in ear-consciousness... in nose-consciousness... in tongue-consciousness... in body-consciousness... in mind-consciousness…

166-213. …Cakkhusamphasse… sotasamphasse… ghānasamphasse… jivhāsamphasse … kāyasamphasse… manosamphasse….

...in eye-contact... in ear-contact... in nose-contact... in tongue-contact... in body-contact... in mind-contact…

214-261. …Cakkhusamphassajāya vedanāya… sotasamphassajāya vedanāya… ghānasamphassajāya vedanāya… jivhāsamphassajāya vedanāya… kāyasamphassajāya vedanāya… manosamphassajāya vedanāya….

...in feeling born of eye-contact... in feeling born of ear-contact... in feeling born of nose-contact... in feeling born of tongue-contact... in feeling born of body-contact... in feeling born of mind-contact…

262-309. …Rūpasaññāya… saddasaññāya… gandhasaññāya… rasasaññāya… phoṭṭhabbasaññāya … dhammasaññāya….

...in perception of forms... in perception of sounds... in perception of smells... in perception of tastes... in perception of tactile objects... in perception of mental phenomena…

310-357. …Rūpasañcetanāya… saddasañcetanāya… gandhasañcetanāya… rasasañcetanāya… phoṭṭhabbasañcetanāya… dhammasañcetanāya….

...in volition concerning forms... in volition concerning sounds... in volition concerning smells... in volition concerning tastes... in volition concerning tactile objects... in volition concerning mental phenomena…

358-405. …Rūpataṇhāya… saddataṇhāya… gandhataṇhāya… rasataṇhāya… phoṭṭhabbataṇhāya… dhammataṇhāya….

...in craving for forms... in craving for sounds... in craving for smells... in craving for tastes... in craving for tactile objects... in craving for mental phenomena…

406-453. …Rūpavitakke… saddavitakke… gandhavitakke… rasavitakke… phoṭṭhabbavitakke… dhammavitakke….

...in thought about forms... in thought about sounds... in thought about smells... in thought about tastes... in thought about tactile objects... in thought about mental phenomena…

454-501. …Rūpavicāre… saddavicāre… gandhavicāre… rasavicāre… phoṭṭhabbavicāre… dhammavicāre aniccānupassī viharituṃ… dukkhānupassī viharituṃ… anattānupassī viharituṃ… khayānupassī viharituṃ… vayānupassī viharituṃ… virāgānupassī viharituṃ… nirodhānupassī viharituṃ… paṭinissaggānupassī viharituṃ…pe….

...in sustained thought on forms... in sustained thought on sounds... in sustained thought on smells... in sustained thought on tastes... in sustained thought on tactile objects... in sustained thought on mental phenomena, incapable of dwelling contemplating impermanence… incapable of dwelling contemplating suffering… incapable of dwelling contemplating not-self… incapable of dwelling contemplating destruction… incapable of dwelling contemplating vanishing… incapable of dwelling contemplating fading away… incapable of dwelling contemplating cessation… incapable of dwelling contemplating relinquishment….

4. Rāgapeyyālaṃ

4.The Repetition Series on Lust

502. ‘‘Rāgassa, bhikkhave, abhiññāya ekādasa dhammā bhāvetabbā. Katame ekādasa? Paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ, dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ, tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ, catutthaṃ jhānaṃ, mettācetovimutti, karuṇācetovimutti, muditācetovimutti, upekkhācetovimutti, ākāsānañcāyatanaṃ, viññāṇañcāyatanaṃ, ākiñcaññāyatanaṃ – rāgassa, bhikkhave, abhiññāya ime ekādasa dhammā bhāvetabbā.

502.Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eleven things are to be developed. What eleven? The first jhāna, the second jhāna, the third jhāna, the fourth jhāna, the liberation of mind by loving-kindness, the liberation of mind by compassion, the liberation of mind by altruistic joy, the liberation of mind by equanimity, the base of infinite space, the base of infinite consciousness, and the base of nothingness—bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, these eleven things are to be developed.

503-511. ‘‘Rāgassa, bhikkhave, pariññāya… parikkhayāya… pahānāya… khayāya… vayāya… virāgāya… nirodhāya… cāgāya… paṭinissaggāya… ime ekādasa dhammā bhāvetabbā.

Bhikkhus, for the full understanding of lust, for its complete destruction, for its abandonment, for its destruction, for its vanishing, for its fading away, for its cessation, for its giving up, and for its relinquishment, these eleven things are to be developed.

512-671. ‘‘Dosassa …pe… mohassa… kodhassa… upanāhassa… makkhassa… paḷāsassa… issāya… macchariyassa… māyāya… sāṭheyyassa… thambhassa… sārambhassa… mānassa… atimānassa… madassa… pamādassa abhiññāya…pe… pariññāya… parikkhayāya… pahānāya… khayāya… vayāya… virāgāya… nirodhāya… cāgāya… paṭinissaggāya ime ekādasa dhammā bhāvetabbā’’ti.

For the direct knowledge of hatred, delusion, anger, resentment, contempt, domineering, envy, stinginess, deceit, craftiness, stubbornness, rivalry, conceit, arrogance, vanity, and negligence; for their full understanding, for their complete destruction, for their abandonment, for their destruction, for their vanishing, for their fading away, for their cessation, for their giving up, and for their relinquishment, these eleven things are to be developed.

Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti.

This the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus, pleased, rejoiced at the Blessed One's words.

Rāgapeyyālaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ.

The Repetition Series on Lust is finished.

Nava suttasahassāni, bhiyyo pañcasatāni ca [pañca suttasatāni ca (aṭṭha.)];Sattapaññāsa suttantā [suttāni (aṭṭha.)], aṅguttarasamāyutā [honti aṅguttarāgame (aṭṭha.)] ti.

Nine thousand suttas and five hundred more; fifty-seven suttas, connected with the Anguttara Nikaya.

Ekādasakanipātapāḷi niṭṭhitā.

The Book of the Elevens is finished.

Aṅguttaranikāyo samatto.

The Anguttara Nikaya is completed.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an11.21-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 357 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN9.36]], [[AN10.7]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.21]]
> ◄  [[an11.20-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
