---
sutta_code: "SN22.105"
sutta_title:
  - "Sakkāyasutta "
  - "Identity"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.105]]
> ◄  [[sn22.104-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.106-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 22.105 Sakkāyasuttaṃ

## SN 22.105 The Discourse on Identity

105. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Sakkāyañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi sakkāyasamudayañca sakkāyanirodhañca sakkāyanirodhagāminiñca paṭipadaṃ. Taṃ suṇātha. Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyo? Pañcupādānakkhandhātissa vacanīyaṃ. Katame pañca? Seyyathidaṃ – rūpupādānakkhandho, vedanupādānakkhandho, saññupādānakkhandho, saṅkhārupādānakkhandho, viññāṇupādānakkhandho. Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyo. Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayo? Yāyaṃ taṇhā ponobhavikā…pe… kāmataṇhā, bhavataṇhā, vibhavataṇhā – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyasamudayo. Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodho? Yo tassāyeva taṇhāya…pe… ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodho. Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo. Seyyathidaṃ – sammādiṭṭhi…pe… sammāsamādhi. Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sakkāyanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’’ti. Tatiyaṃ.

105.At Sāvatthī. “I will teach you, bhikkhus, identity, the origin of identity, the cessation of identity, and the way leading to the cessation of identity. Listen to that. And what, bhikkhus, is identity? It should be said: the five aggregates of clinging. Which five? That is, the form aggregate of clinging, the feeling aggregate of clinging, the perception aggregate of clinging, the mental formations aggregate of clinging, the consciousness aggregate of clinging. This, bhikkhus, is called identity. And what, bhikkhus, is the origin of identity? It is this craving that leads to renewed existence…namely, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, craving for non-existence. This, bhikkhus, is called the origin of identity. And what, bhikkhus, is the cessation of identity? It is the remainderless fading away and cessation of that very craving, its abandonment, relinquishment, liberation, and non-attachment. This, bhikkhus, is called the cessation of identity. And what, bhikkhus, is the way leading to the cessation of identity? It is just this Noble Eightfold Path. That is, right view…right samādhi. This, bhikkhus, is called the way leading to the cessation of identity.” Third.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.105-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA46.2]], [[SA71]] | S iii 159 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.20]], [[EA46.2]], [[SA71]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.105]]
> ◄  [[sn22.104-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn22.106-deepseek-pali]] ►
