---
sutta_code: "SN31.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Mūlagandhadātāsutta "
  - "A Giver of Fragrant Roots"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN31]]  / 🌐 [[SN31.3]]
> ◄  [[sn31.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn31.4-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

### I. Fairies — SN31.3: A Giver of Fragrant Roots
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots?”

“bhikkhu, it’s when someone does good things by way of body, speech, and mind. And they’ve heard: ‘The gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.’ They think: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots!’ They give gifts of fragrant roots. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots.

This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of fairykind who live in fragrant roots.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo, yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṁ devānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti?

"Idha, bhikkhu, ekacco kāyena sucaritaṁ carati, vācāya sucaritaṁ carati, manasā sucaritaṁ carati. Tassa sutaṁ hoti: ‘mūlagandhe adhivatthā devā dīghāyukā vaṇṇavanto sukhabahulā’ti. Tassa evaṁ hoti: ‘aho vatāhaṁ kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṁ devānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyyan’ti. So dātā hoti mūlagandhānaṁ. So kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṁ devānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjati.

Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhu, hetu … pe … yena midhekacco kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā mūlagandhe adhivatthānaṁ devānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjatī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn31.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 250 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN31]]  / 🌐 [[SN31.3]]
> ◄  [[sn31.2-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn31.4-sujato-pali]] ►
