---
sutta_code: "SN36.18"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - "A Number of Bhikkhus"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.18]]
> ◄  [[sn36.17-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.19-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 36.18 Dutiyasambahulasuttaṃ

## SN 36.18 The Second Discourse About Several bhikkhus

266. Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu…pe… ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavā etadavoca – ‘‘katamā nu kho, bhikkhave, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṃ nissaraṇa’’nti? ‘‘Bhagavaṃmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā…pe…’’ ‘‘tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā – sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā – imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, vedanā…pe… phassasamudayā…pe…. (Yathā purimasuttante, tathā vitthāretabbo.) Aṭṭhamaṃ.

266.Then several bhikkhus approached the Blessed One... Having sat down to one side, the Blessed One addressed those bhikkhus thus: "bhikkhus, what is feeling? What is the origin of feeling? What is the cessation of feeling? What is the path leading to the cessation of feeling? What is the gratification in feeling? What is the danger? What is the escape?" "Our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, venerable sir..." "bhikkhus, there are these three feelings: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. These, bhikkhus, are called feelings... From the arising of contact... (To be elaborated as in the previous discourse.) The eighth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SA476]] | S iv 222 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN36.11]], [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SN36.15]], [[SN36.16]], [[SN36.17]], [[SN36.1]], [[SA476]], [[SN36.23]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN36.11]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.18]]
> ◄  [[sn36.17-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.19-deepseek-pali]] ►
