---
sutta_code: "SN36.31"
sutta_title:
  - "Nirāmisasutta "
  - "Spiritual"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.31]]
> ◄  [[sn36.30-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

# SN 36.31 Nirāmisasuttaṃ

## SN 36.31 The Discourse on the Unworldly

279. ‘‘Atthi, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti, atthi nirāmisā pīti, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti; atthi sāmisaṃ sukhaṃ, atthi nirāmisaṃ sukhaṃ, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisataraṃ sukhaṃ; atthi sāmisā upekkhā, atthi nirāmisā upekkhā, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā; atthi sāmiso vimokkho, atthi nirāmiso vimokkho, atthi nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho. Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti? Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. Katame pañca? Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā…pe… kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. Yā kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati pīti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisā pīti.

279."bhikkhus, there is worldly joy, there is unworldly joy, there is joy more unworldly than unworldly; there is worldly pleasure, there is unworldly pleasure, there is pleasure more unworldly than unworldly; there is worldly equanimity, there is unworldly equanimity, there is equanimity more unworldly than unworldly; there is worldly liberation, there is unworldly liberation, there is liberation more unworldly than unworldly. And what, bhikkhus, is worldly joy? There are these five cords of sensual pleasure. What five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual desire, enticing... (and so on, down to)... tangibles cognizable by the body that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual desire, enticing. These, bhikkhus, are the five cords of sensual pleasure. The joy that arises dependent on these five cords of sensual pleasure—this is called, bhikkhus, worldly joy.

‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā pīti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā pīti.

"And what, bhikkhus, is unworldly joy? Here, bhikkhus, a monk, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, enters and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by initial application and sustained application, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. With the subsiding of initial application and sustained application, he enters and abides in the second jhāna, which has internal assurance and unification of mind, is without initial application and sustained application, and has rapture and pleasure born of samādhi. This is called, bhikkhus, unworldly joy.

‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti? Yā kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato uppajjati pīti, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā pīti.

"And what, bhikkhus, is joy more unworldly than unworldly? When, bhikkhus, a monk whose taints are destroyed reviews his mind thus liberated from lust, thus liberated from hatred, thus liberated from delusion, the joy that arises is called, bhikkhus, joy more unworldly than unworldly.

‘‘Katamañca, bhikkhave, sāmisaṃ sukhaṃ? Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. Katame pañca? Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā…pe… kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisaṃ sukhaṃ.

"And what, bhikkhus, is worldly pleasure? There are these five cords of sensual pleasure. What five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual desire, enticing... (and so on, down to)... tangibles cognizable by the body that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual desire, enticing. These, bhikkhus, are the five cords of sensual pleasure. The pleasure and joy that arise dependent on these five cords of sensual pleasure—this is called, bhikkhus, worldly pleasure.

‘‘Katamañca, bhikkhave, nirāmisaṃ sukhaṃ? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṃ savicāraṃ vivekajaṃ pītisukhaṃ paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca viharati sato ca sampajāno sukhañca kāyena paṭisaṃvedeti, yaṃ taṃ ariyā ācikkhanti – ‘upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti tatiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisaṃ sukhaṃ.

"And what, bhikkhus, is unworldly pleasure? Here, bhikkhus, a monk, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, enters and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by initial application and sustained application, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. With the subsiding of initial application and sustained application, he enters and abides in the second jhāna, which has internal assurance and unification of mind, is without initial application and sustained application, and has rapture and pleasure born of samādhi. With the fading away of rapture, he abides equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending, and experiences in his body the pleasure of which the noble ones declare: ‘Equanimous and mindful, he abides in pleasure.’ He enters and abides in the third jhāna. This is called, bhikkhus, unworldly pleasure.

‘‘Katamañca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataraṃ sukhaṃ? Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato uppajjati sukhaṃ somanassaṃ, idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataraṃ sukhaṃ.

"And what, bhikkhus, is pleasure more unworldly than unworldly? When, bhikkhus, a monk whose taints are destroyed reviews his mind thus liberated from lust, thus liberated from hatred, thus liberated from delusion, the pleasure and joy that arises is called, bhikkhus, pleasure more unworldly than unworldly.

‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhave, sāmisā upekkhā? Pañcime, bhikkhave, kāmaguṇā. Katame pañca? Cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā…pe… kāyaviññeyyā phoṭṭhabbā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṃhitā rajanīyā. Ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca kāmaguṇā. Yā kho, bhikkhave, ime pañca kāmaguṇe paṭicca uppajjati upekkhā, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sāmisā upekkhā.

"And what, bhikkhus, is worldly equanimity? There are these five cords of sensual pleasure. Which five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual desire, enticing... (and so on, down to)... tangibles cognizable by the body that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual desire, enticing. These, bhikkhus, are the five cords of sensual pleasure. The equanimity that arises dependent on these five cords of sensual pleasure—this is called, bhikkhus, worldly equanimity.

‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā upekkhā? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sukhassa ca pahānā, dukkhassa ca pahānā, pubbeva somanassadomanassānaṃ atthaṅgamā, adukkhamasukhaṃ upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṃ catutthaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā upekkhā.

"And what, bhikkhus, is unworldly equanimity? Here, bhikkhus, a monk, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and sorrow, enters and abides in the fourth jhāna, which is neither painful nor pleasant and contains the purity of mindfulness by equanimity. This is called, bhikkhus, unworldly equanimity.

‘‘Katamā ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā? Yā kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato uppajjati upekkhā, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisatarā upekkhā.

"And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity more unworldly than unworldly? When, bhikkhus, a monk whose taints are destroyed reviews his mind thus liberated from lust, thus liberated from hatred, thus liberated from delusion, the equanimity that arises is called, bhikkhus, equanimity more unworldly than unworldly.

‘‘Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sāmiso vimokkho? Rūpappaṭisaṃyutto vimokkho sāmiso vimokkho.

"And what, bhikkhus, is worldly liberation? Liberation connected with form is worldly liberation.

‘‘Katamo ca, bhikkhave, nirāmiso vimokkho? Arūpappaṭisaṃyutto vimokkho nirāmiso vimokkho.

"And what, bhikkhus, is unworldly liberation? Liberation connected with the formless is unworldly liberation.

‘‘Katamo ca, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho? Yo kho, bhikkhave, khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, dosā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato, mohā cittaṃ vimuttaṃ paccavekkhato uppajjati vimokkho, ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, nirāmisā nirāmisataro vimokkho’’ti. Ekādasamaṃ.

"And what, bhikkhus, is liberation more unworldly than unworldly? When, bhikkhus, a monk whose taints are destroyed reviews his mind thus liberated from lust, thus liberated from hatred, thus liberated from delusion, the liberation that arises is called, bhikkhus, liberation more unworldly than unworldly." The eleventh.

Aṭṭhasatapariyāyavaggo tatiyo.

The Chapter on the Eight Hundred Ways is the third.

Tassuddānaṃ –

Its summary:

Sīvakaaṭṭhasataṃ bhikkhu, pubbe ñāṇañca bhikkhunā;Samaṇabrāhmaṇā tīṇi, suddhikañca nirāmisanti.

Sīvaka, the eight hundred, the monk; and knowledge of the past by the monk; Ascetics and brahmins, three; and Suddhika and Nirāmisa.

Vedanāsaṃyuttaṃ samattaṃ.

The Connected Discourses on Feeling is completed.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.31-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA483]] | S iv 235 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA483]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN36.19.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.31]]
> ◄  [[sn36.30-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
