---
sutta_code: "SA574"
sutta_pts: ""
sutta_title:
  - "SA 33.9 "
  - "?"
nikaya:
  - "SA "
  - "Saṃyukta Āgama"
sutta_chapter:
  - "SA33"
  - "33"
  - "T99"
  - ""
sutta_theme:
  - "Meditation"
sutta_topic:
  - "Jhanas"
sutta_training:
  - "Samādhi"
sutta_stage:
  - "Middle"
sutta_method:
  - "qa"
sutta_aspect:
  - "Training"
sutta_prominence:
  - ""
sutta_length:
  - "Detail"
sutta_formula:
  - ""
sutta_teacher:
  - "Citta"
sutta_audience:
  - "Ascetics"
parallels_nikaya: ""
parallels_agama: ""
parallels_partilal: "[[SN41.8]]"
---
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[SA]] | ◄  [[SA573]]  🌐 [[SA575]] ►

# SA574 - SA 33.9 - ?
## 🌐 Overview

> [!info] Summary
> The jain leader mahāvīra, known as nigaṇṭha nātaputa in the buddhist tradition, is visited by Citta. Mahāvīra asks him whether he believes in a certain state of immersion. When Citta replies that he doesn’t go by faith in the Buddha  on this point, mahāvīra is delighted. But it turns out Citta doesn’t need faith, as he experiences such a state for himself.

> [!info] Key Excerpts 
> Citta meets with the naked ascetic Kassapa, an old friend of his, and asks what gains he has realized from the spiritual life. Kassapa admits he has realized no higher attainments, whereupon Citta reveals he has realized many such attainments. Kassapa decides to ordain as a buddhist bhikkhu.
> 
> It's possible to experience any of the 4jhanas when ever I want and since I know and see like this, why should I rely on faith in another ascetic or brahmin who claims that there is a state of immersion without placing the mind and keeping it connected
> 


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sa574-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN41.8]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!example]- [[Suttas.base#suttas-themes| Suttas Catalogue]] to find related suttas by theme

> [!example]- [🔍Community contributions](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BSA574%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D%20OR%20%22%5B%5BSA574%5D%5D%22%20%5Bauthor%5D%20-%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) linked to this sutta
> 
> Search for any community contributions like books, selections, anthologies, etc. That have a link to this sutta **and** have the property [contribution]

> [!example]- [🔍Indexes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BSA574%5D%5D%22%20%5Bcontribution%3Aindex%5D) by subject, similes or nikayas

> [!example]- [🔍 Search in My Notes](obsidian://search?query=%22%5B%5BSA574%5D%5D%22%23mynotes%20-file%3Asa574-%20-file%3A%22SA573%22%20-file%3A%22SA575%22%20-file%3A%22SA574%22) (expand for info)
> This is a personal filter. It searches **only** the notes you have written yourself (tagged **#**mynotes ) that link to this Sutta.

>[!info]- Expand for more [[Online Resources]]
>
> - Sutta Central: https://suttacentral.net/sa574/en/patton?lang=en&layout=plain&script=latin
> - Dhamma Gift: 
> - The Buddhas Words: 


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] |📔 [[SA]] | ◄  [[SA573]]  🌐 [[SA575]] ►
