---
sutta_code: "SN45.49"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.49]]
> ◄  [[sn45.48-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.50-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 45.49 Kalyāṇamittasuttaṃ

## SN 45.49 The Discourse on Good Friendship.

70. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Ekadhammo, bhikkhave, bahūpakāro ariyassa aṭṭhaṅgikassa maggassa uppādāya. Katamo ekadhammo? Yadidaṃ – kalyāṇamittatā. Kalyāṇamittassetaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṃ – ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvessati, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkarissati. Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti rāgavinayapariyosānaṃ dosavinayapariyosānaṃ mohavinayapariyosānaṃ…pe… sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti rāgavinayapariyosānaṃ dosavinayapariyosānaṃ mohavinayapariyosānaṃ. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkarotī’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.

70.At Sāvatthī. “One thing, bhikkhus, is very helpful for the arising of the Noble Eightfold Path. What is that one thing? It is good friendship. It is to be expected of a monk with good friends, bhikkhus, that he will develop the Noble Eightfold Path, that he will cultivate the Noble Eightfold Path. And how, bhikkhus, does a monk with good friends develop the Noble Eightfold Path, cultivate the Noble Eightfold Path? Here, bhikkhus, a monk develops Right View culminating in the removal of lust, the removal of hatred, and the removal of delusion… he develops Right samādhi culminating in the removal of lust, the removal of hatred, and the removal of delusion. Thus, bhikkhus, a monk with good friends develops the Noble Eightfold Path, cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path.” The first.

## 2-6. Sīlasampadādisuttapañcakaṃ

### Five Discourses beginning with the Accomplishment of Virtue.

71-75. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Ekadhammo, bhikkhave, bahūpakāro ariyassa aṭṭhaṅgikassa maggassa uppādāya. Katamo ekadhammo? Yadidaṃ – sīlasampadā…pe… yadidaṃ – chandasampadā…pe… yadidaṃ – attasampadā…pe… yadidaṃ – diṭṭhisampadā…pe… yadidaṃ – appamādasampadā…pe…. Chaṭṭhaṃ.

71-75. At Sāvatthī. “One thing, bhikkhus, is very helpful for the arising of the Noble Eightfold Path. What is that one thing? It is accomplishment of virtue… accomplishment of zeal… accomplishment of self-possession… accomplishment of view… accomplishment of heedfulness….” The sixth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.49-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.49]]
> ◄  [[sn45.48-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.50-deepseek-pali]] ►
