---
sutta_code: "SN45.44"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.44]]
> ◄  [[sn45.43-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.45-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 45.44 Yonisomanasikārasampadāsuttaṃ

## SN 45.44 The Discourse on the Accomplishment of Wise Attention.

55. ‘‘Sūriyassa, bhikkhave, udayato etaṃ pubbaṅgamaṃ etaṃ pubbanimittaṃ, yadidaṃ – aruṇuggaṃ; evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno ariyassa aṭṭhaṅgikassa maggassa uppādāya etaṃ pubbaṅgamaṃ etaṃ pubbanimmittaṃ, yadidaṃ – yonisomanasikārasampadā. Yonisomanasikārasampannassetaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṃ – ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvessati, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkarissati. Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yonisomanasikārasampanno ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ…pe… sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yonisomanasikārasampanno ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkarotī’’ti. Sattamaṃ.

55.“Monks, just as the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise, so too, monks, for the arising of the Noble Eightfold Path for a monk, the forerunner and precursor is the accomplishment of wise attention. Monks, it is to be expected of a monk accomplished in wise attention that he will develop the Noble Eightfold Path, that he will cultivate the Noble Eightfold Path. And how, monks, does a monk accomplished in wise attention develop the Noble Eightfold Path, cultivate the Noble Eightfold Path? Here, monks, a monk develops right view, which is based on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, culminating in relinquishment… he develops right samādhi, which is based on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, culminating in relinquishment. Thus, monks, a monk accomplished in wise attention develops the Noble Eightfold Path, cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path.” The seventh.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.44-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.44]]
> ◄  [[sn45.43-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.45-deepseek-pali]] ►
