---
sutta_code: "SN45.47"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.47]]
> ◄  [[sn45.46-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.48-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 45.47 Kalyāṇamittasuttaṃ

## SN 45.47 The Discourse on Good Friendship

63. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Ekadhammo, bhikkhave, bahūpakāro ariyassa aṭṭhaṅgikassa maggassa uppādāya. Katamo ekadhammo? Yadidaṃ – kalyāṇamittatā. Kalyāṇamittassetaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno pāṭikaṅkhaṃ – ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāvessati, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkarissati. Kathañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkaroti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ…pe… sammāsamādhiṃ bhāveti vivekanissitaṃ virāganissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bhāveti, ariyaṃ aṭṭhaṅgikaṃ maggaṃ bahulīkarotī’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.

63.At Sāvatthī. “One thing, bhikkhus, is very helpful for the arising of the Noble Eightfold Path. What is that one thing? It is good friendship. It is to be expected of a monk with good friends, bhikkhus, that he will develop the Noble Eightfold Path, that he will cultivate the Noble Eightfold Path. And how, bhikkhus, does a monk with good friends develop the Noble Eightfold Path, cultivate the Noble Eightfold Path? Here, bhikkhus, a monk develops Right View based on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, culminating in relinquishment… he develops Right samādhi based on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, culminating in relinquishment. Thus, bhikkhus, a monk with good friends develops the Noble Eightfold Path, cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path.” The first.

## 2-6. Sīlasampadādisuttapañcakaṃ

### 2-6. Five Discourses beginning with the Accomplishment of Virtue

64-68. ‘‘Ekadhammo, bhikkhave, bahūpakāro ariyassa aṭṭhaṅgikassa maggassa uppādāya. Katamo ekadhammo? Yadidaṃ – sīlasampadā…pe… yadidaṃ – chandasampadā…pe… yadidaṃ – attasampadā…pe… yadidaṃ – diṭṭhisampadā…pe… yadidaṃ – appamādasampadā…pe…. Chaṭṭhaṃ.

64-68. “One thing, bhikkhus, is very helpful for the arising of the Noble Eightfold Path. What is that one thing? It is accomplishment of virtue… accomplishment of zeal… accomplishment of self-possession… accomplishment of view… accomplishment of heedfulness….” The sixth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.47-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.47]]
> ◄  [[sn45.46-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.48-deepseek-pali]] ►
