---
sutta_code: "SN45.26"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyaasappurisasutta "
  - "The Inferior Person (2)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.26]]
> ◄  [[sn45.25-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.27-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 45.26 Dutiyaasappurisasuttaṃ

## SN 45.26 The Discourse on the Unworthy Person (II)

26. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Asappurisañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi, asappurisena asappurisatarañca. Sappurisañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi sappurisena sappurisatarañca. Taṃ suṇātha. Katamo ca, bhikkhave, asappuriso? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchādiṭṭhiko hoti…pe… micchāsamādhi – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, asappuriso’’.

26.At Sāvatthī. “Monks, I will teach you about the unworthy person and one who is even more unworthy than an unworthy person. I will teach you about the worthy person and one who is even more worthy than a worthy person. Listen to that. And what, monks, is the unworthy person? Here, monks, a certain person has wrong view… wrong samādhi. This, monks, is called the unworthy person.”

‘‘Katamo ca, bhikkhave, asappurisena asappurisataro? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco micchādiṭṭhiko hoti…pe… micchāsamādhi, micchāñāṇī, micchāvimutti – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, asappurisena asappurisataro.

“And what, monks, is one who is even more unworthy than an unworthy person? Here, monks, a certain person has wrong view… wrong samādhi, wrong knowledge, wrong liberation. This, monks, is called one who is even more unworthy than an unworthy person.”

‘‘Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sappuriso? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammādiṭṭhiko hoti…pe… sammāsamādhi – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sappuriso.

“And what, monks, is the worthy person? Here, monks, a certain person has right view… right samādhi. This, monks, is called the worthy person.”

‘‘Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sappurisena sappurisataro? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco sammādiṭṭhiko hoti…pe… sammāsamādhi, sammāñāṇī, sammāvimutti – ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, sappurisena sappurisataro’’ti. Chaṭṭhaṃ.

“And what, monks, is one who is even more worthy than a worthy person? Here, monks, a certain person has right view… right samādhi, right knowledge, right liberation. This, monks, is called one who is even more worthy than a worthy person.” The Sixth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.26-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 20 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.26]]
> ◄  [[sn45.25-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn45.27-deepseek-pali]] ►
