---
sutta_code: "SN35.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyābhinandasutta "
  - "Delight (2)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.2]]
> ◄  [[sn35.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.3-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.2 Ajjhattadukkhasuttaṃ

## SN 35.2 Ajjhattadukkhasuttaṃ: The Discourse on Inner Suffering

2. ‘‘Cakkhuṃ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā; yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Sotaṃ dukkhaṃ…pe… ghānaṃ dukkhaṃ… jivhā dukkhā… kāyo dukkho… mano dukkho. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā; yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī’’ti. Dutiyaṃ.

2. "The eye, bhikkhus, is suffering. What is suffering is not-self; what is not-self should be seen as it really is with right wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' The ear is suffering... The nose is suffering... The tongue is suffering... The body is suffering... The mind is suffering. What is suffering is not-self; what is not-self should be seen as it really is with right wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Seeing thus... he understands: '...there is no more coming to any state of being.'" The second.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA195]] | S iv 2 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA195]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.2]]
> ◄  [[sn35.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.3-deepseek-pali]] ►
