---
sutta_code: "SN35.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Bāhiradukkhasutta "
  - "External as Suffering"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.5]]
> ◄  [[sn35.4-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.6-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.5 Bāhiradukkhasuttaṃ

## SN 35.5 The Discourse on External Suffering

5. ‘‘Rūpā, bhikkhave, dukkhā. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā; yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Saddā… gandhā… rasā… phoṭṭhabbā… dhammā dukkhā. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī’’ti. Pañcamaṃ.

5. "bhikkhus, forms are suffering. What is suffering is not-self. What is not-self should be seen with right wisdom as it truly is: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Sounds... smells... tastes... touches... mental phenomena are suffering. What is suffering is not-self. What is not-self should be seen with right wisdom as it truly is: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Seeing thus... he understands: 'There is no more coming to any state of being.'" The fifth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA195]] | S iv 3 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA195]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.5]]
> ◄  [[sn35.4-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.6-deepseek-pali]] ►
