---
sutta_code: "SN35.24"
sutta_title:
  - "Pahānasutta "
  - "Abandonment (1)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.24]]
> ◄  [[sn35.23-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.25-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.24 Pahānasuttaṃ

## SN 35.24 The Discourse on Abandonment

24. ‘‘Sabbappahānāya [sabbaṃ pahānāya (syā. kaṃ. ka.)] vo, bhikkhave, dhammaṃ desessāmi. Taṃ suṇātha. Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sabbappahānāya dhammo? Cakkhuṃ, bhikkhave, pahātabbaṃ, rūpā pahātabbā, cakkhuviññāṇaṃ pahātabbaṃ, cakkhusamphasso pahātabbo, yampidaṃ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi pahātabbaṃ…pe… yampidaṃ sotasamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi pahātabbaṃ… yampidaṃ ghānasamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi pahātabbaṃ. Jivhā pahātabbā, rasā pahātabbā, jivhāviññāṇaṃ pahātabbaṃ, jivhāsamphasso pahātabbo, yampidaṃ jivhāsamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi pahātabbaṃ. Kāyo pahātabbo… mano pahātabbo, dhammā pahātabbā, manoviññāṇaṃ pahātabbaṃ, manosamphasso pahātabbo, yampidaṃ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi pahātabbaṃ. Ayaṃ kho, bhikkhave, sabbappahānāya dhammo’’ti. Dutiyaṃ.

24. “bhikkhus, I will teach you the Dhamma for the abandoning of all. Listen to it. And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma for the abandoning of all? The eye, bhikkhus, is to be abandoned; forms are to be abandoned; eye-consciousness is to be abandoned; eye-contact is to be abandoned; and whatever feeling arises dependent on eye-contact—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned… The ear is to be abandoned; sounds are to be abandoned; ear-consciousness is to be abandoned; ear-contact is to be abandoned; and whatever feeling arises dependent on ear-contact—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned… The nose is to be abandoned; odors are to be abandoned; nose-consciousness is to be abandoned; nose-contact is to be abandoned; and whatever feeling arises dependent on nose-contact—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned. The tongue is to be abandoned; flavors are to be abandoned; tongue-consciousness is to be abandoned; tongue-contact is to be abandoned; and whatever feeling arises dependent on tongue-contact—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned. The body is to be abandoned… The mind is to be abandoned; mental objects are to be abandoned; mind-consciousness is to be abandoned; mind-contact is to be abandoned; and whatever feeling arises dependent on mind-contact—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned. This, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma for the abandoning of all.” The second.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA224]] | S iv 15 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA224]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.248]], [[MN1]], [[MA106]], [[AN4.174]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.24]]
> ◄  [[sn35.23-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.25-deepseek-pali]] ►
