---
sutta_code: "SN35.152"
sutta_title:
  - "Kimatthiyabrahmacariyasutta "
  - "For What Purpose the Holy Life?"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.152]]
> ◄  [[sn35.151-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.153-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.152 Ajjhattātītāniccasuttaṃ

## SN 35.152 The Discourse on Internal Past Impermanence

186. ‘‘Cakkhu, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ atītaṃ…pe… jivhā aniccā atītā…pe… mano anicco atīto. Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati…pe… jivhāyapi nibbindati…pe… manasmimpi nibbindati. Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. ‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī’’ti.

186."The eye, bhikkhus, is impermanent, past... The tongue is impermanent, past... The mind is impermanent, past. Seeing thus, bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple becomes disenchanted with the eye... becomes disenchanted with the tongue... becomes disenchanted with the mind. Disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion, he is liberated. When liberated, there is the knowledge that he is liberated. He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’"


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.152-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 149 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.70]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.152]]
> ◄  [[sn35.151-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.153-deepseek-pali]] ►
