---
sutta_code: "SN35.53"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.53]]
> ◄  [[sn35.52-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.54-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.53 Dutiyachaphassāyatanasuttaṃ

## SN 35.53 The Second Discourse on the Six Sense Bases

72. ‘‘Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. Avusitaṃ tena brahmacariyaṃ, ārakā so imasmā dhammavinayā’’ti.

72.bhikkhus, any monk who does not understand as it actually is the origination, the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of the six sense bases has not lived the holy life; he is far from this Dhamma and Discipline.

Evaṃ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘etthāhaṃ, bhante, anassasaṃ panassasaṃ. Ahañhi, bhante, channaṃ phassāyatanānaṃ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāmī’’ti.

When this was said, a certain monk said to the Blessed One: "Here, venerable sir, I am undone. For I, venerable sir, do not understand as it actually is the origination, the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of the six sense bases."

‘‘Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, bhikkhu, cakkhuṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassasī’’ti?

What do you think, monk? Do you regard the eye as: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self'?

‘‘Evaṃ, bhante’’.

Even so, venerable sir.

‘‘Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, cakkhu ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṃ bhavissati. Evaṃ te etaṃ paṭhamaṃ phassāyatanaṃ pahīnaṃ bhavissati āyatiṃ apunabbhavāya…pe….

Good, monk. And as regards the eye, monk, it will be clearly seen with right wisdom as it actually is: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Thus, this first sense base will be abandoned by you for no renewed existence in the future… and so on.

‘‘Jivhaṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassasī’’ti?

Do you regard the tongue as: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self'?

‘‘Evaṃ, bhante’’.

Even so, venerable sir.

‘‘Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, jivhā ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṃ bhavissati. Evaṃ te etaṃ catutthaṃ phassāyatanaṃ pahīnaṃ bhavissati āyatiṃ apunabbhavāya…pe….

Good, monk. And as regards the tongue, monk, it will be clearly seen with right wisdom as it actually is: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Thus, this fourth sense base will be abandoned by you for no renewed existence in the future… and so on.

‘‘Manaṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti samanupassasī’’ti?

Do you regard the mind as: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self'?

‘‘Evaṃ, bhante’’.

Even so, venerable sir.

‘‘Sādhu, bhikkhu, ettha ca te, bhikkhu, mano ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṃ bhavissati. Evaṃ te etaṃ chaṭṭhaṃ phassāyatanaṃ pahīnaṃ bhavissati āyatiṃ apunabbhavāyā’’ti. Dasamaṃ.

Good, monk. And as regards the mind, monk, it will be clearly seen with right wisdom as it actually is: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Thus, this sixth sense base will be abandoned by you for no renewed existence in the future.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.53-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.53]]
> ◄  [[sn35.52-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.54-deepseek-pali]] ►
