---
sutta_code: "SN35.98"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṁvarasutta "
  - "Restraint"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.98]]
> ◄  [[sn35.97-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.99-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.98 Kāmaguṇasuttaṃ

## SN 35.98 The Discourse on Sensual Qualities

117. ‘‘Pubbeva me, bhikkhave, sambodhā anabhisambuddhassa bodhisattasseva sato etadahosi – ‘yeme pañca kāmaguṇā cetaso samphuṭṭhapubbā atītā niruddhā vipariṇatā, tatra me cittaṃ bahulaṃ gacchamānaṃ gaccheyya paccuppannesu vā appaṃ vā anāgatesu’. Tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi – ‘yeme pañca kāmaguṇā cetaso samphuṭṭhapubbā atītā niruddhā vipariṇatā, tatra me attarūpena appamādo sati cetaso ārakkho karaṇīyo’. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, tumhākampi ye te pañca kāmaguṇā cetaso samphuṭṭhapubbā atītā niruddhā vipariṇatā, tatra vo cittaṃ bahulaṃ gacchamānaṃ gaccheyya paccuppannesu vā appaṃ vā anāgatesu. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, tumhākampi ye te pañca kāmaguṇā cetaso samphuṭṭhapubbā atītā niruddhā vipariṇatā, tatra vo attarūpehi appamādo sati cetaso ārakkho karaṇīyo. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha jivhā ca nirujjhati, rasasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’’ti. Idaṃ vatvā bhagavā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ pāvisi.

117."Before my enlightenment, bhikkhus, while I was still an unenlightened Bodhisatta, this occurred to me: ‘These five cords of sensual pleasure that have previously been experienced by the mind—past, ceased, and changed—my mind might frequently incline toward them, whether they are present, or scarcely in the future.’ Then, bhikkhus, this occurred to me: ‘Regarding these five cords of sensual pleasure that have previously been experienced by the mind—past, ceased, and changed—in my own person, diligence, mindfulness, and mental protection should be cultivated.’ Therefore, bhikkhus, you too: ‘These five cords of sensual pleasure that have previously been experienced by the mind—past, ceased, and changed—your mind might frequently incline toward them, whether they are present, or scarcely in the future.’ Therefore, bhikkhus, you too should cultivate diligence, mindfulness, and mental protection in your own persons. Therefore, bhikkhus, that dimension should be understood where the eye ceases and the perception of forms ceases; that dimension should be understood… where the tongue ceases and the perception of tastes ceases; that dimension should be understood… where the mind ceases and the perception of mental phenomena ceases.” Having said this, the Blessed One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Atha kho tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ acirapakkantassa bhagavato etadahosi – ‘‘idaṃ kho no, āvuso, bhagavā saṃkhittena uddesaṃ uddisitvā vitthārena atthaṃ avibhajitvā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ paviṭṭho – ‘tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha jivhā ca nirujjhati, rasasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’ti. Ko nu kho imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa vitthārena atthaṃ vibhajeyyā’’ti?

Then, shortly after the Blessed One had left, those bhikkhus had this thought: “Friends, the Blessed One gave this brief instruction without elaborating on the meaning in detail, then rose from his seat and entered his dwelling: ‘Therefore, bhikkhus, that dimension should be understood where the eye ceases and the perception of forms ceases; that dimension should be understood… where the tongue ceases and the perception of tastes ceases; that dimension should be understood… where the mind ceases and the perception of mental phenomena ceases.’ Now who could explain in detail the meaning of this brief instruction given by the Blessed One without elaborating on the meaning in detail?”

Atha kho tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ etadahosi – ‘‘ayaṃ kho āyasmā ānando satthu ceva saṃvaṇṇito, sambhāvito ca viññūnaṃ sabrahmacārīnaṃ. Pahoti cāyasmā ānando imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa vitthārena atthaṃ vibhajituṃ. Yaṃnūna mayaṃ yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkameyyāma; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etamatthaṃ paṭipuccheyyāmā’’ti.

Then those bhikkhus thought: “Venerable Ānanda is both praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise fellow practitioners. And Venerable Ānanda is capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief instruction, which the Blessed One gave in brief without elaborating on the meaning in detail. Why don’t we approach Venerable Ānanda, and after approaching, ask Venerable Ānanda about this matter?”

Atha kho te bhikkhū yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā ānandena saddhiṃ sammodiṃsu. Sammodanīyaṃ kathaṃ sāraṇīyaṃ vītisāretvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavocuṃ –

So those bhikkhus approached Venerable Ānanda. Having approached, they exchanged greetings with Venerable Ānanda. After exchanging polite and amiable conversation, they sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, those bhikkhus said to Venerable Ānanda:

‘‘Idaṃ kho no, āvuso ānanda, bhagavā saṃkhittena uddesaṃ uddisitvā vitthārena atthaṃ avibhajitvā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ paviṭṭho – ‘tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha jivhā ca nirujjhati, rasasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’ti. Tesaṃ no, āvuso, amhākaṃ acirapakkantassa bhagavato etadahosi – ‘idaṃ kho no, āvuso, bhagavā saṃkhittena uddesaṃ uddisitvā vitthārena atthaṃ avibhajitvā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ paviṭṭho – tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha jivhā ca nirujjhati, rasasaññā ca nirujjhati se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’ti. Ko nu kho imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa vitthārena atthaṃ vibhajeyyāti? Tesaṃ no, āvuso, amhākaṃ etadahosi – ‘ayaṃ kho āyasmā ānando satthu ceva saṃvaṇṇito, sambhāvito ca viññūnaṃ sabrahmacārīnaṃ. Pahoti cāyasmā ānando imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa vitthārena atthaṃ vibhajituṃ. Yaṃnūna mayaṃ yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkameyyāma; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etamatthaṃ paṭipuccheyyāmā’ti. Vibhajatāyasmā ānando’’ti.

“Friends, the Blessed One gave us this brief instruction and, without elaborating on the meaning in detail, rose from his seat and entered his dwelling: ‘Therefore, bhikkhus, that dimension should be understood where the eye ceases and the perception of forms ceases. That dimension should be understood… where the tongue ceases and the perception of tastes ceases. That dimension should be understood… where the mind ceases and the perception of mental phenomena ceases.’
Soon after the Blessed One had left, we thought, ‘Friends, the Blessed One gave us this brief instruction and, without elaborating on the meaning in detail, rose from his seat and entered his dwelling: "Therefore, bhikkhus, that dimension should be understood where the eye ceases and the perception of forms ceases. That dimension should be understood… where the tongue ceases and the perception of tastes ceases. That dimension should be understood… where the mind ceases and the perception of mental phenomena ceases." Who now could explain in detail the meaning of this brief instruction given by the Blessed One, without elaborating on the meaning in detail?’
Then we thought, ‘Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise fellow practitioners. He is capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief instruction given by the Blessed One, without elaborating on the meaning in detail. Let us approach Venerable Ānanda and ask him about this matter.’ Venerable Ānanda, please explain it to us.”

‘‘Seyyathāpi, āvuso, puriso sāratthiko sāragavesī sārapariyesanaṃ caramāno mahato rukkhassa…pe… vibhajatāyasmā ānando agaruṃ karitvāti.

“Just as, friend, a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, would approach a large tree… Please explain, Venerable Ānanda, without treating it lightly.”

‘‘Tenahāvuso, suṇātha, sādhukaṃ manasi karotha; bhāsissāmī’’ti. ‘‘Evamāvuso’’ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato ānandassa paccassosuṃ. Āyasmā ānando etadavoca –

“Therefore, friends, listen, pay close attention; I will speak.” “Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied to Venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda said this:

‘‘Yaṃ kho vo, āvuso, bhagavā saṃkhittena uddesaṃ uddisitvā vitthārena atthaṃ avibhajitvā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ paviṭṭho – ‘tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’ti. Imassa khvāhaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāmi. Saḷāyatananirodhaṃ no etaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā sandhāya bhāsitaṃ – ‘tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe, yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’ti. Ayaṃ kho, āvuso, bhagavā saṃkhittena uddesaṃ uddisitvā vitthārena atthaṃ avibhajitvā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ paviṭṭho – ‘tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’ti. Imassa khvāhaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa evaṃ vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāmi. Ākaṅkhamānā ca pana tumhe āyasmanto bhagavantaṃyeva upasaṅkamatha; upasaṅkamitvā etamatthaṃ puccheyyātha. Yathā vo bhagavā byākaroti tathā naṃ dhāreyyāthā’’ti.

“Friends, the Blessed One gave a brief instruction and, without elaborating on the meaning in detail, rose from his seat and entered his dwelling: ‘Therefore, bhikkhus, that dimension should be understood where the eye ceases and the perception of forms ceases. That dimension should be understood… where the mind ceases and the perception of mental phenomena ceases.’ I understand the detailed meaning of this brief instruction given by the Blessed One as follows. Friends, this was spoken by the Blessed One in reference to the cessation of the six sense bases: ‘Therefore, bhikkhus, that dimension should be understood where the eye ceases and the perception of forms ceases. That dimension should be understood… where the mind ceases and the perception of mental phenomena ceases.’ This is how I understand the detailed meaning of this brief instruction given by the Blessed One. But if you wish, venerable ones, you may approach the Blessed One himself and ask him about this matter. You should remember it as the Blessed One explains it to you.”

‘‘Evamāvuso’’ti kho te bhikkhū āyasmato ānandassa paṭissutvā uṭṭhāyāsanā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdiṃsu. Ekamantaṃ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṃ etadavocuṃ –

“Very well, friend,” replied those bhikkhus to Venerable Ānanda. Having risen from their seats, they approached the Blessed One. Having approached, they paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, those bhikkhus said this to the Blessed One:

‘‘Yaṃ kho no, bhante, bhagavā saṃkhittena uddesaṃ uddisitvā vitthārena atthaṃ avibhajitvā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ paviṭṭho – ‘tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha jivhā ca nirujjhati, rasasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’ti, tesaṃ no, bhante, amhākaṃ acirapakkantassa bhagavato etadahosi – ‘idaṃ kho no, āvuso, bhagavā saṃkhittena uddesaṃ uddisitvā vitthārena atthaṃ avibhajitvā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṃ paviṭṭho – tasmātiha, bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhu ca nirujjhati, rūpasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe…pe… yattha mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca nirujjhati, se āyatane veditabbe’ti. ‘Ko nu kho imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa vitthārena atthaṃ vibhajeyyā’ti? Tesaṃ no, bhante, amhākaṃ etadahosi – ‘ayaṃ kho āyasmā ānando satthu ceva saṃvaṇṇito, sambhāvito ca viññūnaṃ sabrahmacārīnaṃ. Pahoti cāyasmā ānando imassa bhagavatā saṃkhittena uddesassa uddiṭṭhassa vitthārena atthaṃ avibhattassa vitthārena atthaṃ vibhajituṃ. Yaṃnūna mayaṃ yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkameyyāma; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etamatthaṃ paṭipuccheyyāmā’ti. Atha kho mayaṃ, bhante, yenāyasmā ānando tenupasaṅkamimha; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etamatthaṃ paṭipucchimha. Tesaṃ no, bhante, āyasmatā ānandena imehi ākārehi, imehi padehi, imehi byañjanehi attho vibhatto’’ti.

“Venerable sir, the Blessed One gave us a brief teaching, and without explaining the meaning in detail, he rose from his seat and entered his dwelling: ‘Therefore, bhikkhus, that dimension should be known where the eye ceases and the perception of forms ceases; that dimension should be known… where the tongue ceases and the perception of tastes ceases; that dimension should be known… where the mind ceases and the perception of mental phenomena ceases; that dimension should be known.’ Venerable sir, soon after the Blessed One had left, we thought: ‘Friends, the Blessed One gave us this brief teaching, and without explaining the meaning in detail, he rose from his seat and entered his dwelling: “Therefore, bhikkhus, that dimension should be known where the eye ceases and the perception of forms ceases; that dimension should be known… where the mind ceases and the perception of mental phenomena ceases; that dimension should be known.” Now, who could explain in detail the meaning of this brief teaching given by the Blessed One, without elaborating on its meaning?’ Venerable sir, we thought: ‘This Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise companions in the holy life. He is capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief teaching given by the Blessed One, without elaborating on its meaning. Why don’t we go to Venerable Ānanda and ask him about this matter?’ Then, venerable sir, we approached Venerable Ānanda and asked him about this matter. Venerable sir, Venerable Ānanda explained the meaning to us in these ways, with these words, with these phrases.”

‘‘Paṇḍito, bhikkhave, ānando; mahāpañño, bhikkhave, ānando! Maṃ cepi tumhe, bhikkhave, etamatthaṃ paṭipuccheyyātha, ahampi taṃ evamevaṃ byākareyyaṃ yathā taṃ ānandena byākataṃ. Eso cevetassa attho. Evañca naṃ dhāreyyāthā’’ti. Catutthaṃ.

“bhikkhus, Ānanda is wise; bhikkhus, Ānanda has great wisdom! bhikkhus, if you were to ask me about this matter, I too would explain it just as Ānanda has explained it. This is indeed its meaning. You should remember it thus.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.98-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 92 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN48.56]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.98]]
> ◄  [[sn35.97-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.99-deepseek-pali]] ►
