---
sutta_code: "SN35.157"
sutta_title:
  - "Bāhiranandikkhayasutta "
  - "The Destruction of Delight (2)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.157]]
> ◄  [[sn35.156-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.158-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.157 Ajjhattapaccuppannayadaniccasuttaṃ

## SN 35.157 The Sutta on the Internal Present as Impermanent

206. ‘‘Cakkhu, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ paccuppannaṃ. Yadaniccaṃ, taṃ dukkhaṃ. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ, tadanattā. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ…pe… jivhā aniccā paccuppannā. Yadaniccaṃ, taṃ dukkhaṃ. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ, tadanattā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ…pe… mano anicco paccuppanno. Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī’’ti.

206."The eye, bhikkhus, is impermanent, present. What is impermanent is suffering. What is suffering is not-self. What is not-self should be seen as it really is with right wisdom as: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ … The tongue is impermanent, present. What is impermanent is suffering. What is suffering is not-self. What is not-self should be seen as it really is with right wisdom as: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ … The mind is impermanent, present. What is impermanent is suffering. What is suffering is not-self. What is not-self should be seen as it really is with right wisdom as: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ Seeing thus… he understands: ‘There is no more for this state of being.’"

## 40-42. Ajjhattātītādiyaṃdukkhasuttaṃ

### 40-42. The Discourse on the Internal, Past, and So Forth as Suffering.

207-209. ‘‘Cakkhu, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ atītaṃ anāgataṃ paccuppannaṃ. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ, tadanattā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ…pe… jivhā dukkhā…pe… mano dukkho atīto anāgato paccuppanno. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ, tadanattā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī’’ti.

207-209. "bhikkhus, the eye is suffering, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is suffering is nonself. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' [...] The tongue is suffering [...] The mind is suffering, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is suffering is nonself. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Seeing thus [...] he understands: 'There is no more coming to any state of being.'"

## 43-45. Ajjhattātītādiyadanattasuttaṃ

### 43-45. The Discourse on the Internal, Past, and So Forth as Nonself.

210-212. ‘‘Cakkhu, bhikkhave, anattā atītaṃ anāgataṃ paccuppannaṃ. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ…pe… jivhā anattā…pe… mano anattā atīto anāgato paccuppanno. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī’’ti.

210-212. "bhikkhus, the eye is nonself, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' [...] The tongue is nonself [...] The mind is nonself, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Seeing thus [...] he understands: 'There is no more coming to any state of being.'"

## 46-48. Bāhirātītādiyadaniccasuttaṃ

### 46-48. The Discourse on the External, Past, and So Forth as Impermanent.

213-215. ‘‘Rūpā, bhikkhave, aniccā atītā anāgatā paccuppannā. Yadaniccaṃ, taṃ dukkhaṃ. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ, tadanattā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Saddā… gandhā… rasā… phoṭṭhabbā… dhammā aniccā atītā anāgatā paccuppannā. Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī’’ti.

213-215. "bhikkhus, forms are impermanent, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is impermanent is suffering. Whatever is suffering is nonself. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Sounds [...] smells [...] tastes [...] tactile sensations [...] mental phenomena are impermanent, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is impermanent is suffering. Whatever is suffering is nonself. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Seeing thus [...] he understands: 'There is no more coming to any state of being.'"

## 49-51. Bāhirātītādiyaṃdukkhasuttaṃ

### 49-51. The Discourse on the External, Past, and So Forth as Suffering.

216-218. ‘‘Rūpā, bhikkhave, dukkhā atītā anāgatā paccuppannā. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ, tadanattā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Saddā… gandhā… rasā… phoṭṭhabbā… dhammā dukkhā atītā anāgatā paccuppannā. Yaṃ dukkhaṃ, tadanattā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī’’ti.

216-218. "bhikkhus, forms are suffering, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is suffering is nonself. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Sounds [...] smells [...] tastes [...] tactile sensations [...] mental phenomena are suffering, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is suffering is nonself. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Seeing thus [...] he understands: 'There is no more coming to any state of being.'"

## 52-54. Bāhirātītādiyadanattasuttaṃ

### 52-54. The Discourse on the External, Past, and So Forth as Nonself.

219-221. ‘‘Rūpā, bhikkhave, anattā atītā anāgatā paccuppannā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Saddā… gandhā… rasā… phoṭṭhabbā… dhammā anattā atītā anāgatā paccuppannā. Yadanattā, taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… nāparaṃ itthattāyāti pajānātī’’ti.

219-221. "bhikkhus, forms are nonself, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Sounds [...] smells [...] tastes [...] tactile sensations [...] mental phenomena are nonself, whether past, future, or present. Whatever is nonself should be seen as it really is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Seeing thus [...] he understands: 'There is no more coming to any state of being.'"


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.157-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA188]] | S iv 150 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA188]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.157]]
> ◄  [[sn35.156-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.158-deepseek-pali]] ►
