---
sutta_code: "SN35.182"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.182]]
> ◄  [[sn35.181-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.183-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.182 Vīṇopamasuttaṃ

## SN 35.182 The Simile of the Lute.

246. ‘‘Yassa kassaci, bhikkhave, bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā cakkhuviññeyyesu rūpesu uppajjeyya chando vā rāgo vā doso vā moho vā paṭighaṃ vāpi [paṭighaṃ vā (sī.)] cetaso, tato cittaṃ nivāreyya. Sabhayo ceso maggo sappaṭibhayo ca sakaṇṭako ca sagahano ca ummaggo ca kummaggo ca duhitiko ca. Asappurisasevito ceso maggo, na ceso maggo sappurisehi sevito. Na tvaṃ etaṃ arahasīti. Tato cittaṃ nivāraye cakkhuviññeyyehi rūpehi…pe… yassa kassaci, bhikkhave, bhikkhussa vā bhikkhuniyā vā jivhāviññeyyesu rasesu…pe… manoviññeyyesu dhammesu uppajjeyya chando vā rāgo vā doso vā moho vā paṭighaṃ vāpi cetaso tato cittaṃ nivāreyya. Sabhayo ceso maggo sappaṭibhayo ca sakaṇṭako ca sagahano ca ummaggo ca kummaggo ca duhitiko ca. Asappurisasevito ceso maggo, na ceso maggo sappurisehi sevito. Na tvaṃ etaṃ arahasīti. Tato cittaṃ nivāraye manoviññeyyehi dhammehi.

246.“Monks, if in any monk or nun there arises desire, lust, hatred, delusion, or aversion of mind toward forms cognizable by the eye, they should restrain the mind. This path is fearful, perilous, thorny, dense, a wrong path, a bad path, and hard to traverse. This path is frequented by the ignoble, not by the noble. ‘You are not worthy of this.’ Therefore, restrain the mind from forms cognizable by the eye…. If in any monk or nun there arises desire, lust, hatred, delusion, or aversion of mind toward tastes cognizable by the tongue… If in any monk or nun there arises desire, lust, hatred, delusion, or aversion of mind toward mental phenomena cognizable by the mind, they should restrain the mind. This path is fearful, perilous, thorny, dense, a wrong path, a bad path, and hard to traverse. This path is frequented by the ignoble, not by the noble. ‘You are not worthy of this.’ Therefore, restrain the mind from mental phenomena cognizable by the mind.”

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kiṭṭhaṃ sampannaṃ. Kiṭṭhārakkho [kiṭṭhārakkhako (sī.)] ca pamatto, goṇo ca kiṭṭhādo aduṃ kiṭṭhaṃ otaritvā yāvadatthaṃ madaṃ āpajjeyya pamādaṃ āpajjeyya; evameva kho, bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano chasu phassāyatanesu asaṃvutakārī pañcasu kāmaguṇesu yāvadatthaṃ madaṃ āpajjati pamādaṃ āpajjati.

“Just as, monks, a field of grain is flourishing, but the field guard is negligent, and a grain-eating bull enters that field and indulges to its heart’s content, becoming intoxicated and negligent; in the same way, monks, an uninstructed ordinary person, acting unrestrainedly in the six sense bases, indulges to their heart’s content in the five strands of sensual pleasure, becoming intoxicated and negligent.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kiṭṭhaṃ sampannaṃ kiṭṭhārakkho ca appamatto goṇo ca kiṭṭhādo aduṃ kiṭṭhaṃ otareyya. Tamenaṃ kiṭṭhārakkho nāsāyaṃ suggahitaṃ gaṇheyya. Nāsāyaṃ suggahitaṃ gahetvā uparighaṭāyaṃ suniggahitaṃ niggaṇheyya. Uparighaṭāyaṃ suniggahitaṃ niggahetvā daṇḍena sutāḷitaṃ tāḷeyya. Daṇḍena sutāḷitaṃ tāḷetvā osajjeyya. Dutiyampi kho, bhikkhave …pe… tatiyampi kho, bhikkhave, goṇo kiṭṭhādo aduṃ kiṭṭhaṃ otareyya. Tamenaṃ kiṭṭhārakkho nāsāyaṃ suggahitaṃ gaṇheyya. Nāsāyaṃ suggahitaṃ gahetvā uparighaṭāyaṃ suniggahitaṃ niggaṇheyya. Uparighaṭāyaṃ suniggahitaṃ niggahetvā daṇḍena sutāḷitaṃ tāḷeyya. Daṇḍena sutāḷitaṃ tāḷetvā osajjeyya. Evañhi so, bhikkhave, goṇo kiṭṭhādo gāmagato vā araññagato vā, ṭhānabahulo vā assa nisajjabahulo vā na taṃ kiṭṭhaṃ puna otareyya – tameva purimaṃ daṇḍasamphassaṃ samanussaranto. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, yato kho bhikkhuno chasu phassāyatanesu cittaṃ udujitaṃ hoti sudujitaṃ, ajjhattameva santiṭṭhati, sannisīdati, ekodi hoti, samādhiyati.

“Just as, monks, when a field of grain is flourishing and the field guard is diligent, but a grain-eating bull still enters that field. The field guard would seize it firmly by the nose. Having seized it firmly by the nose, he would hold it tightly by the upper halter. Having held it tightly by the upper halter, he would strike it soundly with a stick. Having struck it soundly with a stick, he would let it go. A second time, monks… A third time, monks, that grain-eating bull might enter the field. The field guard would seize it firmly by the nose. Having seized it firmly by the nose, he would hold it tightly by the upper halter. Having held it tightly by the upper halter, he would strike it soundly with a stick. Having struck it soundly with a stick, he would let it go. In this way, monks, that grain-eating bull—whether it goes to the village or to the forest, whether standing often or sitting often—would not enter that field again, remembering that earlier beating with the stick. “In the same way, monks, when a monk’s mind is well-tamed and thoroughly tamed regarding the six sense bases, it becomes inwardly steady, settles down, becomes unified, and collected.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, rañño vā rājamahāmattassa vā vīṇāya saddo assutapubbo assa. So vīṇāsaddaṃ suṇeyya. So evaṃ vadeyya – ‘ambho, kassa [kissa (sī. pī.)] nu kho eso saddo evaṃrajanīyo evaṃkamanīyo evaṃmadanīyo evaṃmucchanīyo evaṃbandhanīyo’ti? Tamenaṃ evaṃ vadeyyuṃ – ‘esā, kho, bhante, vīṇā nāma, yassā eso saddo evaṃrajanīyo evaṃkamanīyo evaṃmadanīyo evaṃmucchanīyo evaṃbandhanīyo’ti. So evaṃ vadeyya – ‘gacchatha me, bho, taṃ vīṇaṃ āharathā’ti. Tassa taṃ vīṇaṃ āhareyyuṃ. Tamenaṃ evaṃ vadeyyuṃ – ‘ayaṃ kho sā, bhante, vīṇā yassā eso saddo evaṃrajanīyo evaṃkamanīyo evaṃmadanīyo evaṃmucchanīyo evaṃbandhanīyo’ti. So evaṃ vadeyya – ‘alaṃ me, bho, tāya vīṇāya, tameva me saddaṃ āharathā’ti. Tamenaṃ evaṃ vadeyyuṃ – ‘ayaṃ kho, bhante, vīṇā nāma anekasambhārā mahāsambhārā. Anekehi sambhārehi samāraddhā vadati, seyyathidaṃ – doṇiñca paṭicca cammañca paṭicca daṇḍañca paṭicca upadhāraṇe ca paṭicca tantiyo ca paṭicca koṇañca paṭicca purisassa ca tajjaṃ vāyāmaṃ paṭicca evāyaṃ, bhante, vīṇā nāma anekasambhārā mahāsambhārā. Anekehi sambhārehi samāraddhā vadatī’ti. So taṃ vīṇaṃ dasadhā vā satadhā vā phāleyya, dasadhā vā satadhā vā taṃ phāletvā sakalikaṃ sakalikaṃ kareyya. Sakalikaṃ sakalikaṃ karitvā agginā ḍaheyya, agginā ḍahitvā masiṃ kareyya. Masiṃ karitvā mahāvāte vā ophuneyya [opuneyya (sī. pī.), ophuṇeyya (?)], nadiyā vā sīghasotāya pavāheyya. So evaṃ vadeyya – ‘asatī kirāyaṃ, bho, vīṇā nāma, yathevaṃ yaṃ [yathevāyaṃ (sī.), yathevayaṃ (pī.)] kiñci vīṇā nāma ettha ca panāyaṃ jano [ettha panāyaṃ jano (syā. kaṃ.), ettha ca mahājano (pī. ka.)] ativelaṃ pamatto palaḷito’ti. Evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu rūpaṃ samanvesati [samannesati (sī. syā. kaṃ.), samanesati (pī.)] yāvatā rūpassa gati, vedanaṃ samanvesati yāvatā vedanāya gati, saññaṃ samanvesati yāvatā saññāya gati, saṅkhāre samanvesati yāvatā saṅkhārānaṃ gati, viññāṇaṃ samanvesati yāvatā viññāṇassa gati. Tassa rūpaṃ samanvesato yāvatā rūpassa gati, vedanaṃ samanvesato…pe… saññaṃ… saṅkhāre… viññāṇaṃ samanvesato yāvatā viññāṇassa gati. Yampissa taṃ hoti ahanti vā mamanti vā asmīti vā tampi tassa na hotī’’ti. Navamaṃ.

“Suppose, monks, a king or a royal minister had never heard the sound of a lute before. He might hear the sound of a lute and say, ‘Good sirs, what is this sound so enchanting, so desirable, so intoxicating, so bewildering, so binding?’ They would say to him, ‘Sir, that is called a lute, whose sound is so enchanting, so desirable, so intoxicating, so bewildering, so binding.’ He would say, ‘Go, my good men, fetch me that lute.’ They would bring him the lute and say, ‘Sir, this is that lute whose sound is so enchanting, so desirable, so intoxicating, so bewildering, so binding.’ He would say, ‘Enough of that lute, my good men. Just bring me that sound.’ They would say, ‘Sir, this lute is made of many parts, a great many parts. It sounds because of the coming together of many parts, that is, because of the belly, the skin, the neck, the tuning pegs, the strings, the bridge, and the appropriate effort of a person. Thus, sir, this lute is made of many parts, a great many parts. It sounds because of the coming together of many parts.’ Then that king or royal minister would split the lute into ten or a hundred pieces. Having split it, he would reduce it to splinters, splinter by splinter. Then he would burn the splinters in a fire and reduce them to ashes. He would scatter the ashes in a strong wind or let them be carried away by a swift river. He would then say, ‘A wretched thing, this so-called lute—whatever is called a lute—by which people have been so long infatuated and deluded!’ “In the same way, monks, a monk investigates form as far as form goes. He investigates feeling as far as feeling goes. He investigates perception as far as perception goes. He investigates volitional formations as far as volitional formations go. He investigates consciousness as far as consciousness goes. As he investigates form as far as form goes, feeling as far as feeling goes, perception as far as perception goes, volitional formations as far as volitional formations go, consciousness as far as consciousness goes—whatever there is in him of ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am’—that too is not for him.” The ninth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.182-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.182]]
> ◄  [[sn35.181-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.183-deepseek-pali]] ►
