---
sutta_code: "SN35.122"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṁyojaniyadhammasutta "
  - "Things That Fetter"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.122]]
> ◄  [[sn35.121-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.123-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.122 Ajjhattadukkhahetusuttaṃ

## SN 35.122 The Discourse on the Cause of Internal Suffering

141. ‘‘Cakkhuṃ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo cakkhussa uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūtaṃ, bhikkhave, cakkhu kuto sukhaṃ bhavissati…pe… jivhā dukkhā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo jivhāya uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūtā, bhikkhave, jivhā kuto sukhā bhavissati…pe… mano dukkho. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo manassa uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūto, bhikkhave, mano kuto sukho bhavissati! Evaṃ passaṃ…pe… ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī’’ti. Aṭṭhamaṃ.

141."The eye, bhikkhus, is suffering. Whatever the cause, whatever the condition for the arising of the eye, that too is suffering. The eye, bhikkhus, arisen from suffering, how could it be pleasant?... The tongue is suffering. Whatever the cause, whatever the condition for the arising of the tongue, that too is suffering. The tongue, bhikkhus, arisen from suffering, how could it be pleasant?... The mind is suffering. Whatever the cause, whatever the condition for the arising of the mind, that too is suffering. The mind, bhikkhus, arisen from suffering, how could it be pleasant! Seeing thus... he understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'" The eighth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.122-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA239]] | S iv 129 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.109]], [[SA239]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.122]]
> ◄  [[sn35.121-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.123-deepseek-pali]] ►
