---
sutta_code: "SN35.139"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyanatumhākasutta "
  - "Not Yours (2)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.139]]
> ◄  [[sn35.138-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.140-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.139 Ajjhattaaniccanandikkhayasuttaṃ

## SN 35.139 The Discourse on Internal Impermanence and the Fading of Delight

158. ‘‘Cakkhuṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasi karotha; cakkhāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassatha. Cakkhuṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yoniso manasikaronto, cakkhāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassanto cakkhusmimpi nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṃ suvimuttanti vuccati. Sotaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasi karotha… ghānaṃ… jivhaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasi karotha; jivhāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassatha. Jivhaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yoniso manasikaronto, jivhāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassanto jivhāyapi nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṃ suvimuttanti vuccati. Kāyaṃ… manaṃ, bhikkhave, yoniso manasi karotha; manāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassatha. Manaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yoniso manasikaronto, manāniccatañca yathābhūtaṃ samanupassanto manasmimpi nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṃ suvimuttanti vuccatī’’ti. Tatiyaṃ.

158.“bhikkhus, attend to the eye properly; and see the impermanence of the eye as it really is. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu attends to the eye properly, seeing its impermanence as it really is, he becomes dispassionate towards the eye. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, attend to the ear properly; and see the impermanence of the ear as it really is. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu attends to the ear properly, seeing its impermanence as it really is, he becomes dispassionate towards the ear. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, attend to the nose properly; and see the impermanence of the nose as it really is. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu attends to the nose properly, seeing its impermanence as it really is, he becomes dispassionate towards the nose. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, attend to the tongue properly; and see the impermanence of the tongue as it really is. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu attends to the tongue properly, seeing its impermanence as it really is, he becomes dispassionate towards the tongue. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, attend to the body properly; and see the impermanence of the body as it really is. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu attends to the body properly, seeing its impermanence as it really is, he becomes dispassionate towards the body. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, attend to the mind properly; and see the impermanence of the mind as it really is. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu attends to the mind properly, seeing its impermanence as it really is, he becomes dispassionate towards the mind. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated.” The Third.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.139-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA269]], [[SA274]] | S iv 142 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.101]], [[SA274]], [[SN35.102]], [[SN35.138]], [[SN22.33]], [[SN22.34]], [[SA269]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.33]], [[SN22.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.139]]
> ◄  [[sn35.138-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.140-deepseek-pali]] ►
