---
sutta_code: "SN35.138"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamanatumhākasutta "
  - "Not Yours (1)1"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.138]]
> ◄  [[sn35.137-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.139-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.138 Bāhiranandikkhayasuttaṃ

## SN 35.138 The Discourse on the Dissolution of External Delight

157. ‘‘Anicceyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu rūpe aniccāti passati, sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. Sammā passaṃ nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṃ suvimuttanti vuccati. Anicceyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sadde… gandhe… rase… phoṭṭhabbe… dhamme aniccāti passati, sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. Sammā passaṃ nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṃ suvimuttanti vuccatī’’ti. Dutiyaṃ.

157.“bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu sees form as impermanent, that is his right view. Seeing rightly, he becomes dispassionate. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu sees sound as impermanent, that is his right view. Seeing rightly, he becomes dispassionate. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu sees odor as impermanent, that is his right view. Seeing rightly, he becomes dispassionate. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu sees taste as impermanent, that is his right view. Seeing rightly, he becomes dispassionate. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu sees tactile objects as impermanent, that is his right view. Seeing rightly, he becomes dispassionate. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated. bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu sees mental phenomena as impermanent, that is his right view. Seeing rightly, he becomes dispassionate. With the fading of delight comes the fading of lust; with the fading of lust comes the fading of delight. With the fading of delight and lust, the mind is said to be well liberated.” The Second.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.138-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA269]], [[SA274]] | S iv 141 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.101]], [[SA274]], [[SN35.102]], [[SN35.139]], [[SN22.33]], [[SN22.34]], [[SA269]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.33]], [[SN22.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.138]]
> ◄  [[sn35.137-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.139-deepseek-pali]] ►
