---
sutta_code: "SN35.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Bāhirāniccasutta "
  - "External as Impermanent"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.4]]
> ◄  [[sn35.3-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.5-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.4 Bāhirāniccasuttaṃ

## SN 35.4 The Discourse on the Impermanence of External Things

4. ‘‘Rūpā, bhikkhave, aniccā. Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Saddā… gandhā… rasā… phoṭṭhabbā… dhammā aniccā. Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako rūpesupi nibbindati, saddesupi nibbindati, gandhesupi nibbindati, rasesupi nibbindati, phoṭṭhabbesupi nibbindati, dhammesupi nibbindati. Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. ‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī’’ti. Catutthaṃ.

4. "bhikkhus, form is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering. What is suffering is not-self. What is not-self should be seen with right wisdom as it truly is: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Sounds... smells... tastes... tactile sensations... mental phenomena are impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering. What is suffering is not-self. What is not-self should be seen with right wisdom as it truly is: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Seeing thus, bhikkhus, a learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted with form, disenchanted with sounds, disenchanted with smells, disenchanted with tastes, disenchanted with tactile sensations, disenchanted with mental phenomena. Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion, he is liberated. When liberated, there is the knowledge: 'Liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'" The fourth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA195]] | S iv 2 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA195]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.4]]
> ◄  [[sn35.3-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.5-deepseek-pali]] ►
