---
sutta_code: "SN35.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Ajjhattāniccasutta "
  - "Internal as Impermanent"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn35.2-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 35.1 Ajjhattāniccasuttaṃ

## SN 35.1 The Discourse on the Internal as Impermanent

1. Evaṃ me sutaṃ. Ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘bhikkhavo’’ti. ‘‘Bhadante’’ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. Bhagavā etadavoca –

1. Thus I have heard. At one time the Blessed One was living at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "bhikkhus!" "Venerable sir," those bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said this:

‘‘Cakkhuṃ, bhikkhave, aniccaṃ. Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Sotaṃ aniccaṃ. Yadaniccaṃ…pe… ghānaṃ aniccaṃ. Yadaniccaṃ…pe… jivhā aniccā. Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Kāyo anicco. Yadaniccaṃ…pe… mano anicco. Yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ; yaṃ dukkhaṃ tadanattā. Yadanattā taṃ ‘netaṃ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti evametaṃ yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ. Evaṃ passaṃ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati, sotasmimpi nibbindati, ghānasmimpi nibbindati, jivhāyapi nibbindati, kāyasmimpi nibbindati, manasmimpi nibbindati. Nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṃ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṃ hoti. ‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.

The eye, bhikkhus, is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering; what is suffering is non-self. What is non-self should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

The ear is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering; what is suffering is non-self. What is non-self should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

The nose is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering; what is suffering is non-self. What is non-self should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

The tongue is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering; what is suffering is non-self. What is non-self should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

The body is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering; what is suffering is non-self. What is non-self should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

The mind is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering; what is suffering is non-self. What is non-self should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

Seeing thus, bhikkhus, a learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted with the eye, disenchanted with the ear, disenchanted with the nose, disenchanted with the tongue, disenchanted with the body, disenchanted with the mind. Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate; through dispassion he is liberated; when liberated, there comes the knowledge: ‘Liberated.’ He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’" The first.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA195]] | S iv 1 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA195]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn35.2-deepseek-pali]] ►
