---
sutta_code: "SN35.186"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.186]]
> ◄  [[sn35.183-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.187-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XVII. Sixty Abbreviated Texts — SN35.186: The Interior Was Impermanent in the Past
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, in the past the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind were impermanent.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”

1"Cakkhu, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ atītaṁ … pe … jivhā aniccā atītā … pe … mano anicco atīto.

Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati … pe … jivhāyapi nibbindati … pe … manasmimpi nibbindati. Nibbindaṁ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṁ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṁ hoti.

‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.

[[Clean Files 3/Bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN35-44/SN35/SN35.181-190/SN35.183-185#content]][[Clean Files 3/Bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN35-44/SN35/SN35.181-190/SN35.187#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.186-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.186]]
> ◄  [[sn35.183-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.187-sujato-pali]] ►
