---
sutta_code: "SN35.75"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyagilānasutta "
  - "Sick (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.75]]
> ◄  [[sn35.74-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.76-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### VIII. Sick — SN35.75: Sick (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha … and asked him: “Sir, in such and such a monastery there’s a bhikkhu who is junior and not well-known. He’s sick, suffering, gravely ill. Please go to him out of compassion.”

2When the Buddha heard that the bhikkhu was junior and ill, understanding that he was not well-known, he went to him. That bhikkhu saw the Buddha coming off in the distance and tried to rise on his cot.

Then the Buddha said to that bhikkhu: “It’s all right, bhikkhu, don’t get up. There are some seats spread out, I will sit there.”

He sat on the seat spread out and said to the bhikkhu: “I hope you’re keeping well, bhikkhu; I hope you’re alright. I hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.”


3“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not alright. … I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical conduct.”

4“In that case, bhikkhu, why do you have remorse and regret?”

5“Because I understand that the Buddha has not taught the Dhamma merely for the sake of ethical purity.”

6“If that is so, what exactly do you understand to be the purpose of teaching the Dhamma?”


7“I understand that the Buddha has taught the Dhamma for the purpose of complete extinguishment by not grasping.”

8“Good, good, bhikkhu! It’s good that you understand that I’ve taught the Dhamma for the purpose of complete extinguishment by not grasping. For that is indeed the purpose.

9“What do you think, bhikkhu? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?”

10“Impermanent, sir.” …


11“Is the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … mind consciousness … mind contact … The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?”

12“Impermanent, sir.”

13“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

14“Suffering, sir.”


15“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and liable to fall apart, is it fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

16“No, sir.”


17“Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye … ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … mind consciousness … mind contact … They grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”

18That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, that bhikkhu was happy with what the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the mind of that bhikkhu was freed from defilements by not grasping.

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu … pe … bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "amukasmiṁ, bhante, vihāre aññataro bhikkhu navo appaññāto ābādhiko dukkhito bāḷhagilāno. Sādhu, bhante, bhagavā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkamatu anukampāṁ upādāyā"ti.

2Atha kho bhagavā navavādañca sutvā gilānavādañca, "appaññāto bhikkhū"ti iti viditvā yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami. Addasā kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ. Disvāna mañcake samadhosi.

Atha kho bhagavā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca: "Alaṁ, bhikkhu, mā tvaṁ mañcake samadhosi. Santimāni āsanāni paññattāni, tatthāhaṁ nisīdissāmī"ti.

Nisīdi bhagavā paññatte āsane. Nisajja kho bhagavā taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca: "Kacci te, bhikkhu, khamanīyaṁ, kacci yāpanīyaṁ, kacci dukkhā vedanā paṭikkamanti no abhikkamanti, paṭikkamosānaṁ paññāyati no abhikkamo"ti?


3"Na me, bhante, khamanīyaṁ, na yāpanīyaṁ … pe … na kho maṁ, bhante, attā sīlato upavadatī"ti.

4"No ce kira te, bhikkhu, attā sīlato upavadati, atha kiñca te kukkuccaṁ ko ca vippaṭisāro"ti?

5"Na khvāhaṁ, bhante, sīlavisuddhatthaṁ bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmī"ti.

6"No ce kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, sīlavisuddhatthaṁ mayā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāsi, atha kimatthaṁ carahi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, mayā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāsī"ti?


7"Anupādāparinibbānatthaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāmī"ti.

8"Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. Sādhu kho tvaṁ, bhikkhu, anupādāparinibbānatthaṁ mayā dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānāsi. Anupādāparinibbānattho hi, bhikkhu, mayā dhammo desito.

9Taṁ kiṁ maññasi, bhikkhu, cakkhu niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?

10"Aniccaṁ, bhante".


11" … pe … Sotaṁ … ghānaṁ … jivhā … kāyo … mano … manoviññāṇaṁ … manosamphasso … yampidaṁ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?

12"Aniccaṁ, bhante".

13"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vā taṁ sukhaṁ vā"ti?

14"Dukkhaṁ, bhante".


15"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ, kallaṁ nu taṁ samanupassituṁ: ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’"ti?

16"No hetaṁ, bhante".


17"Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati … pe … manasmimpi … manoviññāṇepi … manosamphassepi nibbindati. Yampidaṁ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tasmimpi nibbindati. Nibbindaṁ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṁ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṁ hoti.

‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.

18Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamano so bhikkhu bhagavato bhāsitaṁ abhinandi. Imasmiñca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṁ bhaññamāne tassa bhikkhussa anupādāya āsavehi cittaṁ vimuccīti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.75-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA1026]] | S iv 67 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA1026]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.75]]
> ◄  [[sn35.74-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.76-sujato-pali]] ►
