---
sutta_code: "SN35.82"
sutta_title:
  - "Lokapañhāsutta "
  - "The World"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.82]]
> ◄  [[sn35.81-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.83-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### VIII. Sick — SN35.82: A Question On the World
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha … and said to him:

2“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘the world’. How is the world defined?”


“It wears away, bhikkhu, that’s why it’s called ‘the world’. And what is wearing away? The eye is wearing away. Sights … eye consciousness … eye contact is wearing away. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also wearing away.

The ear … nose … tongue … body … The mind … thoughts … mind consciousness … mind contact is wearing away. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also wearing away.

It wears away, bhikkhu, that’s why it’s called ‘the world’.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 

2"‘Loko, loko’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, lokoti vuccatī"ti?


"‘Lujjatī’ti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā lokoti vuccati. Kiñca lujjati? Cakkhu kho, bhikkhu, lujjati. Rūpā lujjanti, cakkhuviññāṇaṁ lujjati, cakkhusamphasso lujjati, yampidaṁ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi lujjati … pe …

… jivhā lujjati … pe … mano lujjati, dhammā lujjanti, manoviññāṇaṁ lujjati, manosamphasso lujjati, yampidaṁ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi lujjati.

Lujjatīti kho, bhikkhu, tasmā lokoti vuccatī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.82-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA231]] | S iv 80 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA231]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.82]]
> ◄  [[sn35.81-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.83-sujato-pali]] ►
