---
sutta_code: "SN35.154"
sutta_title:
  - "Indriyasampannasutta "
  - "Equipped with Faculties"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.154]]
> ◄  [[sn35.153-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.155-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XV. The Old and the New — SN35.154: Endowed With Faculties
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha … and asked him: “Sir, they speak of someone who is ‘accomplished regarding the faculties’. How is someone accomplished regarding the faculties defined?”


2“bhikkhu, if someone meditates observing rise and fall in the eye faculty, they grow disillusioned with the eye faculty. If they meditate observing rise and fall in the ear faculty … nose faculty … tongue faculty … body faculty … mind faculty, they grow disillusioned with the mind faculty. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. … When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’

This is how someone who is accomplished regarding the faculties is defined.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "‘indriyasampanno, indriyasampanno’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, indriyasampanno hotī"ti?


2"Cakkhundriye ce, bhikkhu, udayabbayānupassī vihāranto cakkhundriye nibbindati … pe … jivhindriye ce, bhikkhu, udayabbayānupassī vihāranto jivhindriye nibbindati … pe … manindriye ce, bhikkhu, udayabbayānupassī vihāranto manindriye nibbindati. Nibbindaṁ virajjati … pe … vimuttasmiṁ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṁ hoti.

‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti.

Ettāvatā kho, bhikkhu, indriyasampanno hotī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.154-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 149 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN48:19.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.154]]
> ◄  [[sn35.153-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.155-sujato-pali]] ►
