---
sutta_code: "SN35.144"
sutta_title:
  - "Bāhiradukkhahetusutta "
  - "Exterior and Cause Are Suffereing"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.144]]
> ◄  [[sn35.143-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.145-sujato-pali]] ►

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIV. At Devadaha — SN35.144: Exterior and Cause Are Suffering
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, sights are suffering. The cause and condition that gives rise to sights is also suffering. Since sights are produced by what is suffering, how could they be happiness?

Sounds …

Smells …

Tastes …

Touches …

Thoughts are suffering. The cause and condition that gives rise to thoughts is also suffering. Since thoughts are produced by what is suffering, how could they be happiness?

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

“Rūpā, bhikkhave, dukkhā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo rūpānaṁ uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūtā, bhikkhave, rūpā kuto sukhā bhavissanti.

Saddā …

gandhā …

rasā …

phoṭṭhabbā …

dhammā dukkhā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo dhammānaṁ uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūtā, bhikkhave, dhammā kuto sukhā bhavissanti.

Evaṁ passaṁ …pe… nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti.

Ekādasamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.144-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 144 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.18]], [[SN22.19]], [[SN22.20]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.144]]
> ◄  [[sn35.143-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.145-sujato-pali]] ►
