---
sutta_code: "SN35.124"
sutta_title:
  - "Vesālīsutta "
  - "At Vesali"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.124]]
> ◄  [[sn35.123-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.125-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIII. Householders — SN35.124: At Vesālī
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then the householder Ugga of Vesālī went up to the Buddha, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life? What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life?”

2“Householder, there are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness relies on that and grasps it. A bhikkhu with grasping does not become extinguished. There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness relies on that and grasps it. A bhikkhu with grasping does not become extinguished.

That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life.


3There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn’t rely on that and grasp it. A bhikkhu free of grasping becomes extinguished. There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn’t rely on that and grasp it. A bhikkhu free of grasping becomes extinguished.

That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā vesāliyaṁ vihārati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṁ. Atha kho uggo gahapati vesāliko yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho uggo gahapati vesāliko bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti? Ko pana, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī"ti?

2"Santi kho, gahapati, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti tadupādānaṁ. Saupādāno, gahapati, bhikkhu no parinibbāyati … pe … santi kho, gahapati, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi kho, gahapati, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti tadupādānaṁ. Saupādāno, gahapati, bhikkhu no parinibbāyati.

Ayaṁ kho, gahapati, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti.


3Santi ca kho, gahapati, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato na tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti, na tadupādānaṁ. Anupādāno, gahapati, bhikkhu parinibbāyati … pe … santi kho, gahapati, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi kho, gahapati, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati, tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato. Na tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti, na tadupādānaṁ. Anupādāno, gahapati, bhikkhu parinibbāyati.

Ayaṁ kho, gahapati, hetu ayaṁ paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.124-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA237]] | S iv 130 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA237]], [[SN35.125]], [[SN35.126]], [[SN35.128]], [[SN35.131]], [[SN35.118]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.124]]
> ◄  [[sn35.123-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.125-sujato-pali]] ►
