---
sutta_code: "SN35.118"
sutta_title:
  - "Sakkapañhasutta "
  - "Sakka's Questin"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.118]]
> ◄  [[sn35.117-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.119-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XII. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation — SN35.118: The Question of Sakka
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. And then Sakka, lord of gods, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life? What is the cause, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life?”

2“Lord of gods, there are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness relies on that and grasps it. A bhikkhu with grasping does not become extinguished.

3There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness relies on that and grasps it. A bhikkhu with grasping does not become extinguished.

That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life.

4There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn’t rely on that and grasp it. A bhikkhu free of grasping becomes extinguished.


5There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn’t rely on that and grasp it. A bhikkhu free of grasping becomes extinguished.

That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā rājagahe vihārati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. Atha kho sakko devānamindo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṁ ṭhito kho sakko devānamindo bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti? Ko pana, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī"ti?

2"Santi kho, devānaminda, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti tadupādānaṁ. Saupādāno, devānaminda, bhikkhu no parinibbāyati … pe … .

3Santi kho, devānaminda, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi kho, devānaminda, manoviññeyyā dhammā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti tadupādānaṁ. Saupādāno, devānaminda, bhikkhu no parinibbāyati.

Ayaṁ kho, devānaminda, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti.

4Santi ca kho, devānaminda, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato na tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti, na tadupādānaṁ. Anupādāno, devānaminda, bhikkhu parinibbāyati … pe … .


5Santi kho, devānaminda, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi kho, devānaminda, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato na tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti na tadupādānaṁ. Anupādāno, devānaminda, bhikkhu parinibbāyati.

Ayaṁ kho, devānaminda, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.118-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA237]] | S iv 126 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.124]], [[SA237]], [[SN35.125]], [[SN35.126]], [[SN35.128]], [[SN35.131]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.118]]
> ◄  [[sn35.117-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.119-sujato-pali]] ►
