---
sutta_code: "SN35.143"
sutta_title:
  - "Bāhirāniccahetusutta "
  - "Exterior and Cause Are Impermanent"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.143]]
> ◄  [[sn35.142-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.144-sujato-pali]] ►

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIV. At Devadaha — SN35.143: Exterior and Cause Are Impermanent
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, sights are impermanent. The cause and condition that gives rise to sights is also impermanent. Since sights are produced by what is impermanent, how could they be permanent?

Sounds …

Smells …

Tastes …

Touches …

Thoughts are impermanent. The cause and condition that gives rise to thoughts is also impermanent. Since thoughts are produced by what is impermanent, how could they be permanent?

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

“Rūpā, bhikkhave, aniccā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo rūpānaṁ uppādāya, sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūtā, bhikkhave, rūpā kuto niccā bhavissanti.

Saddā …

gandhā …

rasā …

phoṭṭhabbā …

dhammā aniccā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo dhammānaṁ uppādāya, sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūtā, bhikkhave, dhammā kuto niccā bhavissanti.

Evaṁ passaṁ …pe… nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī”ti.

Dasamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.143-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 144 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.18]], [[SN22.19]], [[SN22.20]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.143]]
> ◄  [[sn35.142-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.144-sujato-pali]] ►
