---
sutta_code: "SN35.115"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyamārapāsasutta "
  - "Māra's Snare (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.115]]
> ◄  [[sn35.114-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.116-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XII. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation — SN35.115: Māra’s Snare (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, there are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, they’re called a bhikkhu who is bound when it comes to sights known by the eye. They’re trapped in Māra’s lair, fallen under Māra’s sway, and caught in Māra’s snare. They’re bound by Māra’s bonds, and the Wicked One can do what he wants with them.

2There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, they’re called a bhikkhu who is bound when it comes to thoughts known by the mind. They’re trapped in Māra’s lair, fallen under Māra’s sway, and caught in Māra’s snare. They’re bound by Māra’s bonds, and the Wicked One can do what he wants with them.


3There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they’re called a bhikkhu not trapped in Māra’s lair, not fallen under Māra’s sway, and released from Māra’s snare. They’re free from Māra’s bonds, and the Wicked One cannot do what he wants with them.

4There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they’re called a bhikkhu not trapped in Māra’s lair, not fallen under Māra’s sway, and released from Māra’s snare. They’re free from Māra’s bonds, and the Wicked One cannot do what he wants with them.”

1"Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu baddho cakkhuviññeyyesu rūpesu, āvāsagato mārassa, mārassa vasaṁ gato, paṭimukkassa mārapāso. Baddho so mārabandhanena yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato … pe … .

2Santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu baddho manoviññeyyesu dhammesu, āvāsagato mārassa, mārassa vasaṁ gato, paṭimukkassa mārapāso. Baddho so mārabandhanena yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato … pe … .


3Santi ca kho, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mutto cakkhuviññeyyehi rūpehi, nāvāsagato mārassa, na mārassa vasaṁ gato, ummukkassa mārapāso. Mutto so mārabandhanena na yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato … pe … .

4Santi, bhikkhave, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu mutto manoviññeyyehi dhammehi, nāvāsagato mārassa, na mārassa vasaṁ gato, ummukkassa mārapāso. Mutto so mārabandhanena na yathākāmakaraṇīyo pāpimato"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.115-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA244]] | S iv 116 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA244]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.115]]
> ◄  [[sn35.114-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.116-sujato-pali]] ►
