---
sutta_code: "SN35.64"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyamigajālasutta "
  - "Migajala (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.64]]
> ◄  [[sn35.63-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.65-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### VII. With Migajāla — SN35.64: With Migajāla (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1Then Venerable Migajāla went up to the Buddha … and said to him:

“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.”

2“Migajāla, there are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keep clinging to them, this gives rise to relishing. Relishing is the origin of suffering, I say.

There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, this gives rise to relishing. Relishing is the origin of suffering, I say.


3There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When relishing ceases, suffering ceases, I say.

There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When relishing ceases, suffering ceases, I say.”


4And then Venerable Migajāla approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then Migajāla, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is no return to any state of existence.” And Migajāla became one of the perfected.

#### Pali

1Atha kho āyasmā migajālo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā migajālo bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṁ desetu, yamahaṁ bhagavato dhammaṁ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan"ti.

2"Santi kho, migajāla, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato uppajjati nandī. Nandisamudayā dukkhasamudayo, migajālāti vadāmi … pe …

Santi ca kho, migajāla, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi ca kho, migajāla, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato uppajjati nandī. Nandisamudayā dukkhasamudayo, migajālāti vadāmi.


3Santi ca kho, migajāla, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato nandī nirujjhati. Nandinirodhā dukkhanirodho, migajālāti vadāmi … pe …

Santi ca kho, migajāla, jivhāviññeyyā rasā iṭṭhā kantā … pe … santi ca kho, migajāla, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato nandī nirujjhati. Nandinirodhā dukkhanirodho, migajālāti vadāmī"ti.


4Atha kho āyasmā migajālo bhagavato bhāsitaṁ abhinanditvā anumoditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.

Atha kho āyasmā migajālo eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihārato nacirasseva – yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṁ – brahmacariyapariyosānaṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi.

"Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā"ti abbhaññāsi. Aññataro ca panāyasmā migajālo arahataṁ ahosīti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.64-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA310]] | S iv 50 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA310]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.64]]
> ◄  [[sn35.63-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.65-sujato-pali]] ►
