---
sutta_code: "SN35.242"
sutta_title:
  - "Dārukkhandhopama "
  - "Simile Of The Log"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.242]]
> ◄  [[sn35.241-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.243-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIX. The Simile of the Vipers — SN35.242: The Simile of the Tree Trunk (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Kimibilā on the bank of the Ganges river. Seeing a large tree trunk being carried along by the current, he addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus, do you see that large tree trunk being carried along by the current of the Ganges river?”


“Yes, sir,” they replied. … When this was said, Venerable Kimbila said to the Buddha:

“But sir, what’s the near shore and what’s the far shore? What’s sinking in the middle? What’s getting stranded on high ground? What’s getting taken by humans or non-humans? What’s getting caught up in a whirlpool? And what’s rotting away?” … “And what, Kimbila, is rotting away? It’s when a bhikkhu has committed the kind of corrupt offense from which there is no rehabilitation. This is called ‘rotting away’.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā kimilāyaṁ vihārati gaṅgāya nadiyā tīre. Addasā kho bhagavā mahantaṁ dārukkhandhaṁ gaṅgāya nadiyā sotena vuyhamānaṁ. Disvāna bhikkhū āmantesi: "passatha no tumhe, bhikkhave, amuṁ mahantaṁ dārukkhandhaṁ gaṅgāya nadiyā sotena vuyhamānan"ti?


"Evaṁ, bhante" … pe … evaṁ vutte, āyasmā kimilo bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"Kiṁ nu kho, bhante, orimaṁ tīraṁ … pe … "katamo ca, kimila, antopūtibhāvo. Idha, kimila, bhikkhu aññataraṁ saṅkiliṭṭhaṁ āpattiṁ āpanno hoti yathārūpāya āpattiyā na vuṭṭhānaṁ paññāyati. Ayaṁ vuccati, kimila, antopūtibhāvo"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.242-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[ITI109]], [[SN22.238]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.242]]
> ◄  [[sn35.241-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.243-sujato-pali]] ►
