---
sutta_code: "SN35.7"
sutta_title:
  - "Ajjhattāniccātītānāgatasutta "
  - "Internal as Impermanent in the Three Times"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.7]]
> ◄  [[sn35.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.8-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### I. Impermanence — SN35.7: The Interior as Impermanent in the Three Times
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, the eye of the past and future is impermanent, let alone the present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn’t worry about the eye of the past, they don’t look forward to enjoying the eye in the future, and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding the eye in the present.


The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind of the past and future is impermanent, let alone the present.


Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn’t worry about the mind of the past, they don’t look forward to enjoying the mind in the future, and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding the mind in the present.”

1"Cakkhuṁ, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ atītānāgataṁ; ko pana vādo paccuppannassa.

Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako atītasmiṁ cakkhusmiṁ anapekkho hoti; anāgataṁ cakkhuṁ nābhinandati; paccuppannassa cakkhussa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti.


Sotaṁ aniccaṁ … ghānaṁ aniccaṁ … jivhā aniccā atītānāgatā; ko pana vādo paccuppannāya. Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako atītāya jivhāya anapekkho hoti; anāgataṁ jivhaṁ nābhinandati; paccuppannāya jivhāya nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hoti. Kāyo anicco … pe … mano anicco atītānāgato; ko pana vādo paccuppannassa.


Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako atītasmiṁ manasmiṁ anapekkho hoti; anāgataṁ manaṁ nābhinandati; paccuppannassa manassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya paṭipanno hotī"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.7-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA195]] | S iv 4 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA195]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.7]]
> ◄  [[sn35.6-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.8-sujato-pali]] ►
