---
sutta_code: "SN35.96"
sutta_title:
  - "Parihānadhammasutta "
  - "Decline"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.96]]
> ◄  [[sn35.95-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.97-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### X. The Sixes — SN35.96: Liable to Decline
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you who is liable to decline, who is not liable to decline, and the six fields of mastery. Listen …

And how is someone liable to decline?

When a bhikkhu sees a sight with the eye, bad, unskillful phenomena arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. Suppose that bhikkhu tolerates them and doesn’t give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. They should understand: ‘My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what the Buddha calls decline.’

2Furthermore, when a bhikkhu hears a sound … smells an odor … tastes a flavor … feels a touch … knows a thought with the mind, bad, unskillful phenomena arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. If that bhikkhu tolerates them and doesn’t give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them, they should understand: ‘My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what the Buddha calls decline.’

That’s how someone is liable to decline.

3And how is someone not liable to decline? When a bhikkhu sees a sight with the eye, bad, unskillful phenomena arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. Suppose that bhikkhu doesn’t tolerate them but gives them up, gets rid of them, eliminates them, and obliterates them. They should understand: ‘My skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha calls non-decline.’

4Furthermore, when a bhikkhu hears a sound … smells an odor … tastes a flavor … feels a touch … knows a thought with the mind, bad, unskillful phenomena arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. Suppose that bhikkhu doesn’t tolerate them but gives them up, gets rid of them, eliminates them, and obliterates them. They should understand: ‘My skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha calls non-decline.’

That’s how someone is not liable to decline.


5And what are the six fields of mastery? When a bhikkhu sees a sight with the eye, bad, unskillful phenomena don’t arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. They should understand: ‘This sense field has been mastered. For this is what the Buddha calls a field of mastery.’ … Furthermore, when a bhikkhu knows a thought with the mind, bad, unskillful phenomena don’t arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. They should understand: ‘This sense field has been mastered. For this is what the Buddha calls a field of mastery.’ These are the six fields of mastery.”

1"Parihānadhammañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi aparihānadhammañca cha ca abhibhāyatanāni. Taṁ suṇātha.

Kathañca, bhikkhave, parihānadhammo hoti?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno cakkhunā rūpaṁ disvā uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā sarasaṅkappā saṁyojaniyā. Tañce bhikkhu adhivāseti nappajahati na vinodeti na byantīkaroti na anabhāvaṁ gameti, veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘parihāyāmi kusalehi dhammehi’. Parihānañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatāti … pe … .

2Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno jivhāya rasaṁ sāyitvā uppajjanti … pe … puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno manasā dhammaṁ viññāya uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā sarasaṅkappā saṁyojaniyā. Tañce bhikkhu adhivāseti nappajahati na vinodeti na byantīkaroti na anabhāvaṁ gameti, veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘parihāyāmi kusalehi dhammehi’. Parihānañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatāti.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, parihānadhammo hoti.

3Kathañca, bhikkhave, aparihānadhammo hoti? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno cakkhunā rūpaṁ disvā uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā sarasaṅkappā saṁyojaniyā. Tañce bhikkhu nādhivāseti pajahati vinodeti byantīkaroti anabhāvaṁ gameti, veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘Na parihāyāmi kusalehi dhammehi’. Aparihānañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatāti … pe … .

4Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno jivhāya rasaṁ sāyitvā uppajjanti … pe … puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno manasā dhammaṁ viññāya uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā sarasaṅkappā saṁyojaniyā. Tañce bhikkhu nādhivāseti pajahati vinodeti byantīkaroti anabhāvaṁ gameti, veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘Na parihāyāmi kusalehi dhammehi’. Aparihānañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatāti.

Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, aparihānadhammo hoti.


5Katamāni ca, bhikkhave, cha abhibhāyatanāni? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno cakkhunā rūpaṁ disvā nuppajjanti pāpakā akusalā sarasaṅkappā saṁyojaniyā. Veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘abhibhūtametaṁ āyatanaṁ’. Abhibhāyatanañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatāti … pe … puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno manasā dhammaṁ viññāya nuppajjanti pāpakā akusalā dhammā sarasaṅkappā saṁyojaniyā. Veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā: ‘abhibhūtametaṁ āyatanaṁ’. Abhibhāyatanañhetaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatāti. Imāni vuccanti, bhikkhave, cha abhibhāyatanānī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.96-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA278]] | S iv 90 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA278]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.96]]
> ◄  [[sn35.95-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.97-sujato-pali]] ►
