---
sutta_code: "SN35.109"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṁyojaniyasutta "
  - "Things That Fetter"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.109]]
> ◄  [[sn35.108-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.110-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XI. Sanctuary — SN35.109: Things Prone to Being Fettered
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the things that are prone to being fettered, and the fetter. Listen …

What are the things that are prone to being fettered? And what is the fetter? The eye is something that’s prone to being fettered. The desire and greed for it is the fetter. The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is something that’s prone to being fettered. The desire and greed for it is the fetter. These are called the things that are prone to being fettered, and this is the fetter.”

1"Saṁyojaniye ca, bhikkhave, dhamme desessāmi saṁyojanañca. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katame ca, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyā dhammā, katamañca saṁyojanaṁ? Cakkhuṁ, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyo dhammo. Yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha saṁyojanaṁ … pe … jivhā saṁyojaniyo dhammo … pe … mano saṁyojaniyo dhammo. Yo tattha chandarāgo, taṁ tattha saṁyojanaṁ. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, saṁyojaniyā dhammā, idaṁ saṁyojanan"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.109-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA239]] | S iv 110 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA239]], [[SN35.122]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.109]]
> ◄  [[sn35.108-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.110-sujato-pali]] ►
