---
sutta_code: "SN35.91"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyaejāsutta "
  - "Being Stirred (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.91]]
> ◄  [[sn35.90-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.92-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### IX. With Channa — SN35.91: Turbulence (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, turbulence is a disease, turbulence is a boil, turbulence is a dart. That’s why the Realized One lives unperturbed, with dart drawn out.

Now, a bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I live unperturbed, with dart drawn out.’ So let them not identify with the eye, let them not identify in the eye, let them not identify from the eye, let them not identify: ‘The eye is mine.’ Let them not identify with sights … eye consciousness … eye contact … Let them not identify with the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact. Let them not identify in that, let them not identify from that, and let them not identify: ‘That is mine.’ For whatever you identify with, whatever you identify in, whatever you identify as, and whatever you identify to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else. The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.


2Let them not identify with the ear … nose … tongue … body …


3Let them not identify with the mind … mind consciousness … mind contact … Let them not identify with the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Let them not identify in that, let them not identify as that, and let them not identify: ‘That is mine.’ For whatever you identify with, whatever you identify in, whatever you identify as, and whatever you identify to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else. The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.


4As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don’t identify with that, they don’t identify in that, they don’t identify as that, and they don’t identify: ‘That is mine.’

Not identifying, they don’t grasp at anything in the world. Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”

1"Ejā, bhikkhave, rogo, ejā gaṇḍo, ejā sallaṁ. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, tathāgato anejo vihārati vītasallo.

Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cepi ākaṅkheyya ‘anejo vihareyyaṁ vītasallo’ti, cakkhuṁ na maññeyya, cakkhusmiṁ na maññeyya, cakkhuto na maññeyya, cakkhu meti na maññeyya; rūpe na maññeyya … cakkhuviññāṇaṁ … cakkhusamphassaṁ … yampidaṁ cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṁ meti na maññeyya. Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṁ maññati, yato maññati, yaṁ meti maññati, tato taṁ hoti aññathā. Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavameva abhinandati … pe … .


2Jivhaṁ na maññeyya, jivhāya na maññeyya, jivhāto na maññeyya, jivhā meti na maññeyya; rase na maññeyya … jivhāviññāṇaṁ … jivhāsamphassaṁ … yampidaṁ jivhāsamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṁ meti na maññeyya. Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṁ maññati, yato maññati, yaṁ meti maññati, tato taṁ hoti aññathā. Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavameva abhinandati … pe … .


3Manaṁ na maññeyya, manasmiṁ na maññeyya, manato na maññeyya, mano meti na maññeyya … manoviññāṇaṁ … manosamphassaṁ … yampidaṁ manosamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṁ sukhaṁ vā dukkhaṁ vā adukkhamasukhaṁ vā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṁ meti na maññeyya. Yañhi, bhikkhave, maññati, yasmiṁ maññati, yato maññati, yaṁ meti maññati, tato taṁ hoti aññathā. Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavameva abhinandati.


4Yāvatā, bhikkhave, khandhadhātuāyatanā tampi na maññeyya, tasmimpi na maññeyya, tatopi na maññeyya, taṁ meti na maññeyya.

So evaṁ amaññamāno na kiñci loke upādiyati. Anupādiyaṁ na paritassati. Aparitassaṁ paccattaññeva parinibbāyati.

‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.91-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA226-227]] | S iv 88 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA226-227]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.30]], [[SN35.31]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.91]]
> ◄  [[sn35.90-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.92-sujato-pali]] ►
