---
sutta_code: "SN35.63"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamamigajālasutta "
  - "Migajala (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.63]]
> ◄  [[sn35.62-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.64-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### VII. With Migajāla — SN35.63: With Migajāla (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Migajāla went up to the Buddha … and said to him:

“Sir, they speak of one who lives alone. How is one who lives alone defined? And how is living with a partner defined?”


2“Migajāla, there are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, this gives rise to relishing. When there’s relishing there’s lust. When there’s lust there is a fetter. A bhikkhu who is fettered by relishing is said to live with a partner.

There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … There are thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, this gives rise to relishing. When there’s relishing there’s lust. When there’s lust there is a fetter. A bhikkhu who is fettered by relishing is said to live with a partner.

A bhikkhu who lives like this is said to live with a partner, even if they frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest that are quiet and still, far from the madding crowd, remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat. Why is that? For craving is their partner, and they haven’t given it up. That’s why they’re said to live with a partner.


3There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When there’s no relishing there’s no lust. When there’s no lust there’s no fetter. A bhikkhu who is not fettered by relishing is said to live alone.

There are sounds … smells … tastes … touches … There are thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When there’s no relishing there’s no lust. When there’s no lust there’s no fetter.

A bhikkhu who is not fettered by relishing is said to live alone. A bhikkhu who lives like this is said to live alone, even if they live in the neighborhood of a village crowded by bhikkhus, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers and their ministers, and teachers of other paths and their disciples. Why is that? For craving is their partner, and they have given it up. That’s why they’re said to live alone.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

Atha kho āyasmā migajālo yena bhagavā … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā migajālo bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"‘Ekavihārī, ekavihārī’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, ekavihārī hoti, kittāvatā ca pana sadutiyavihārī hotī"ti?


2"Santi kho, migajāla, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato uppajjati nandī. Nandiyā sati sārāgo hoti; sārāge sati saṁyogo hoti. Nandisaṁyojanasaṁyutto kho, migajāla, bhikkhu sadutiyavihārīti vuccati.

… pe … Santi kho, migajāla, jivhāviññeyyā rasā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato uppajjati nandī. Nandiyā sati sārāgo hoti; sārāge sati saṁyogo hoti. Nandisaṁyojanasaṁyutto kho, migajāla, bhikkhu sadutiyavihārīti vuccati.

Evaṁvihārī ca, migajāla, bhikkhu kiñcāpi araññavanapatthāni pantāni senāsanāni paṭisevati appasaddāni appanigghosāni vijanavātāni manussarāhasseyyakāni paṭisallānasāruppāni; atha kho sadutiyavihārīti vuccati. Taṁ kissa hetu? Taṇhā hissa dutiyā, sāssa appahīnā. Tasmā ‘sadutiyavihārī’ti vuccati.


3Santi ca kho, migajāla, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato nandī nirujjhati. Nandiyā asati sārāgo na hoti; sārāge asati saṁyogo na hoti. Nandisaṁyojanavisaṁyutto kho, migajāla, bhikkhu ekavihārīti vuccati … pe …

… santi ca kho, migajāla, jivhāviññeyyā rasā … pe … santi ca kho, migajāla, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato nandī nirujjhati. Nandiyā asati sārāgo na hoti; sārāge asati saṁyogo na hoti. Nandisaṁyojanavippayutto kho, migajāla, bhikkhu ekavihārīti vuccati.

Evaṁvihārī ca, migajāla, bhikkhu kiñcāpi gāmante vihārati ākiṇṇo bhikkhūhi bhikkhunīhi upāsakehi upāsikāhi rājūhi rājamahāmattehi titthiyehi titthiyasāvakehi. Atha kho ekavihārīti vuccati. Taṁ kissa hetu? Taṇhā hissa dutiyā, sāssa pahīnā. Tasmā ‘ekavihārī’ti vuccatī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.63-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA309]] | S iv 50 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA309]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.63]]
> ◄  [[sn35.62-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.64-sujato-pali]] ►
