---
sutta_code: "SN35.119"
sutta_title:
  - "Pañcasikhasutta "
  - "Pañcasikha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.119]]
> ◄  [[sn35.118-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.120-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XII. The World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation — SN35.119: The Question of Pañcasikha
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. And then the fairy Pañcasikha went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life? What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life?”

“Pañcasikha, there are sights known by the eye … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness relies on that and grasps it. A bhikkhu with grasping does not become extinguished. That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings aren’t fully extinguished in the present life.

2There are sights known by the eye … thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a bhikkhu doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn’t rely on that and grasp it. A bhikkhu free of grasping becomes extinguished. That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in the present life.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā rājagahe vihārati gijjhakūṭe pabbate. Atha kho pañcasikho gandhabbadevaputto yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ aṭṭhāsi. Ekamantaṁ ṭhito kho pañcasikho gandhabbadevaputto bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"ko nu kho, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti? Ko pana, bhante, hetu, ko paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī"ti?

"Santi kho, pañcasikha, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā … pe … santi kho, pañcasikha, manoviññeyyā dhammā, iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu abhinandati abhivadati ajjhosāya tiṭṭhati. Tassa taṁ abhinandato abhivadato ajjhosāya tiṭṭhato tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti tadupādānaṁ. Saupādāno, pañcasikha, bhikkhu no parinibbāyati. Ayaṁ kho, pañcasikha, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme no parinibbāyanti.

2Santi ca kho, pañcasikha, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā … pe … santi kho, pañcasikha, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Tañce bhikkhu nābhinandati nābhivadati nājjhosāya tiṭṭhati, tassa taṁ anabhinandato anabhivadato anajjhosāya tiṭṭhato na tannissitaṁ viññāṇaṁ hoti, na tadupādānaṁ. Anupādāno, pañcasikha, bhikkhu parinibbāyati. Ayaṁ kho, pañcasikha, hetu, ayaṁ paccayo yena midhekacce sattā diṭṭheva dhamme parinibbāyantī"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.119-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 126 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.119]]
> ◄  [[sn35.118-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.120-sujato-pali]] ►
