---
sutta_code: "SN35.94"
sutta_title:
  - "Adantaaguttasutta "
  - "Untamed, Unguarded"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.94]]
> ◄  [[sn35.93-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.95-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### X. The Sixes — SN35.94: Untamed, Unguarded
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, these six fields of contact bring suffering when they’re untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained. What six?

The field of eye contact brings suffering when it’s untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained. The field of ear contact … nose contact … tongue contact … body contact … The field of mind contact brings suffering when it’s untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained.

These six fields of contact bring suffering when they’re untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained.


2These six fields of contact bring happiness when they’re well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained. What six?

The field of eye contact brings happiness when it’s well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained. The field of ear contact … nose contact … tongue contact … body contact … The field of mind contact brings happiness when it’s well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained.

These six fields of contact bring happiness when they’re well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained.”

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:


3“bhikkhus, it’s just the six fields of contact  
that lead the unrestrained to suffering.  
Those who understand how to restrain them  
live with faith as partner, uncorrupted.

4When you’ve seen pleasant sights  
and unpleasant ones, too,  
get rid of desire for the pleasant,  
without hating what you don’t like.

5When you’ve heard sounds both liked and disliked,  
don’t fall under the thrall of sounds you like,  
get rid of hate for the unliked,  
and don’t hurt your mind by thinking of what you don’t like.

6When you’ve smelled a pleasant, fragrant scent,  
and one that’s foul and unpleasant,  
get rid of aversion for the unpleasant,  
while not yielding to desire for the pleasant.

7When you’ve enjoyed a sweet, delicious taste,  
and sometimes those that are bitter,  
don’t be attached to enjoying sweet tastes,  
and don’t despise the bitter.

8Don’t be intoxicated by a pleasant touch,  
and don’t tremble at a painful touch.  
Look with equanimity at the duality of pleasant and painful contacts,  
without favoring or opposing anything.

9People generally let their perceptions proliferate;  
perceiving and proliferating, they are attracted.  
When you’ve dispelled all thoughts of the lay life,  
wander intent on renunciation.

10When the mind is well developed like this regarding the six,  
it doesn’t waver at contacts at all.  
bhikkhus, those who have mastered greed and hate  
go beyond birth and death.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Chayime, bhikkhave, phassāyatanā adantā aguttā arakkhitā asaṁvutā dukkhādhivāhā honti. Katame cha?

Cakkhu, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṁ adantaṁ aguttaṁ arakkhitaṁ asaṁvutaṁ dukkhādhivāhaṁ hoti … pe … jivhā, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṁ adantaṁ aguttaṁ arakkhitaṁ asaṁvutaṁ dukkhādhivāhaṁ hoti … pe … mano, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṁ adantaṁ aguttaṁ arakkhitaṁ asaṁvutaṁ dukkhādhivāhaṁ hoti.

Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha phassāyatanā adantā aguttā arakkhitā asaṁvutā dukkhādhivāhā honti".


2Chayime, bhikkhave, phassāyatanā sudantā suguttā surakkhitā susaṁvutā sukhādhivāhā honti. Katame cha?

Cakkhu, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṁ sudantaṁ suguttaṁ surakkhitaṁ susaṁvutaṁ sukhādhivāhaṁ hoti … pe … jivhā, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṁ sudantaṁ suguttaṁ surakkhitaṁ susaṁvutaṁ sukhādhivāhaṁ hoti … pe … mano, bhikkhave, phassāyatanaṁ sudantaṁ suguttaṁ surakkhitaṁ susaṁvutaṁ sukhādhivāhaṁ hoti.

Ime kho, bhikkhave, cha phassāyatanā sudantā suguttā surakkhitā susaṁvutā sukhādhivāhā hontī"ti.

Idamavoca bhagavā … pe … etadavoca satthā: 


3"Saḷeva phassāyatanāni bhikkhavo,  
Asaṁvuto yattha dukkhaṁ nigacchati;  
Tesañca ye saṁvaraṇaṁ avedisuṁ,  
Saddhādutiyā vihārantānavassutā.

4Disvāna rūpāni manoramāni,  
Athopi disvāna amanoramāni;  
Manorame rāgapathaṁ vinodaye,  
Na cāppiyaṁ meti manaṁ padosaye.

5Saddañca sutvā dubhayaṁ piyāppiyaṁ,  
Piyamhi sadde na samucchito siyā;  
Athoppiye dosagataṁ vinodaye,  
Na cāppiyaṁ meti manaṁ padosaye.

6Gandhañca ghatvā surabhiṁ manoramaṁ,  
Athopi ghatvā asuciṁ akantiyaṁ;  
Akantiyasmiṁ paṭighaṁ vinodaye,  
Chandānunīto na ca kantiye siyā.

7Rasañca bhotvāna asāditañca sāduṁ,  
Athopi bhotvāna asādumekadā;  
Sāduṁ rasaṁ nājjhosāya bhuñje,  
Virodhamāsādusu nopadaṁsaye.

8Phassena phuṭṭho na sukhena majje,  
Dukkhena phuṭṭhopi na sampavedhe;  
Phassadvayaṁ sukhadukkhe upekkhe,  
Anānuruddho aviruddha kenaci.

9Papañcasaññā itarītarā narā,  
Papañcayantā upayanti saññino;  
Manomayaṁ gehasitañca sabbaṁ,  
Panujja nekkhammasitaṁ irīyati.

10Evaṁ mano chassu yadā subhāvito,  
Phuṭṭhassa cittaṁ na vikampate kvaci;  
Te rāgadose abhibhuyya bhikkhavo,  
Bhavattha jātimaraṇassa pāragā"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.94-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA279]] | S iv 89 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA279]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN13]], [[AN14]], [[AN15]], [[AN16]], [[AN17]], [[AN18]], [[AN19]], [[AN20]], [[AN21]], [[AN22]], [[AN23]], [[AN24]], [[AN25]], [[AN26]], [[AN27]], [[AN28]], [[AN29]], [[AN30]], [[AN31]], [[AN32]], [[AN33]], [[AN34]], [[AN35]], [[AN36]], [[AN37]], [[AN38]], [[AN39]], [[AN40]], [[AN41]], [[AN42]], [[AN43]], [[AN44]], [[AN45]], [[AN46]], [[AN47]], [[AN48]], [[AN49]], [[AN50]], [[AN51]], [[AN52]], [[AN53]], [[AN54]], [[AN55]], [[AN56]], [[AN57]], [[AN58]], [[AN59]], [[AN60]], [[AN61]], [[AN62]], [[AN63]], [[AN64]], [[AN65]], [[AN66]], [[AN67]], [[AN68]], [[AN69]], [[AN70]], [[AN71]], [[AN72]], [[AN73]], [[AN74]], [[AN75]], [[AN76]], [[AN77]], [[AN78]], [[AN79]], [[AN80]], [[AN81]], [[AN82]], [[AN83]], [[AN84]], [[AN85]], [[AN86]], [[AN87]], [[AN88]], [[AN89]], [[AN90]], [[AN91]], [[AN92]], [[AN93]], [[AN94]], [[AN95]], [[AN96]], [[AN97]], [[AN98]], [[AN99]], [[AN100]], [[AN101]], [[AN102]], [[AN103]], [[AN104]], [[AN105]], [[AN106]], [[AN107]], [[AN108]], [[AN109]], [[AN110]], [[AN111]], [[AN112]], [[AN113]], [[AN114]], [[AN115]], [[AN116]], [[AN117]], [[AN118]], [[AN119]], [[AN120]], [[AN121]], [[AN122]], [[AN123]], [[AN124]], [[AN125]], [[AN126]], [[AN127]], [[AN128]], [[AN129]], [[AN130]], [[AN131]], [[AN132]], [[AN133]], [[AN134]], [[AN135]], [[AN136]], [[AN137]], [[AN138]], [[AN139]], [[AN140]], [[AN141]], [[AN142]], [[AN143]], [[AN144]], [[AN145]], [[AN146]], [[AN147]], [[AN148]], [[AN149]], [[AN150]], [[AN151]], [[AN152]], [[AN153]], [[AN154]], [[AN155]], [[AN156]], [[AN157]], [[AN158]], [[AN159]], [[AN160]], [[AN161]], [[AN162]], [[AN163]], [[AN164]], [[AN165]], [[AN166]], [[AN167]], [[AN168]], [[AN169]], [[AN170]], [[AN171]], [[AN172]], [[AN173]], [[AN174]], [[AN175]], [[AN176]], [[AN177]], [[AN178]], [[AN179]], [[AN180]], [[AN181]], [[AN182]], [[AN183]], [[AN184]], [[AN185]], [[AN186]], [[AN187]], [[AN188]], [[AN189]], [[AN190]], [[AN191]], [[AN192]], [[AN193]], [[AN194]], [[AN195]], [[AN196]], [[AN197]], [[AN198]], [[AN199]], [[AN200]], [[AN201]], [[AN202]], [[AN203]], [[AN204]], [[AN205]], [[AN206]], [[AN207]], [[AN208]], [[AN209]], [[AN210]], [[AN211]], [[AN212]], [[AN213]], [[AN214]], [[AN215]], [[AN216]], [[AN217]], [[AN218]], [[AN6]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.94]]
> ◄  [[sn35.93-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.95-sujato-pali]] ►
