---
sutta_code: "SN35.240"
sutta_title:
  - "Kummopama "
  - "Simile Of Tortoise"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.240]]
> ◄  [[sn35.239-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.241-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIX. The Simile of the Vipers — SN35.240: The Simile of the Tortoise
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“Once upon a time, bhikkhus, a tortoise was grazing along the bank of a river in the afternoon. At the same time, a jackal was also hunting along the river bank. The tortoise saw the jackal off in the distance hunting, so it drew its limbs and neck inside its shell, and kept still and silent.

But the jackal also saw the tortoise off in the distance grazing. So it went up to the tortoise and waiting nearby, thinking, ‘When that tortoise sticks one or other of its limbs or neck out from its shell, I’ll grab it right there, rip it out, and eat it!’

But when that tortoise didn’t stick one or other of its limbs or neck out from its shell, the jackal left disappointed, since it couldn’t find a vulnerability.


2In the same way, Māra the Wicked is always waiting nearby, thinking: ‘Hopefully I can find a vulnerability in the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind.’ That’s why you should live with sense doors guarded.

When you see a sight with your eyes, don’t get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.


When you hear a sound with your ears …

When you smell an odor with your nose …

When you taste a flavor with your tongue …

When you feel a touch with your body …

When you know a thought with your mind, don’t get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of desire and aversion would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.

When you live with your sense doors restrained, Māra will leave you disappointed, since he can’t find a vulnerability, just like the jackal left the tortoise.


3A bhikkhu should collect their thoughts  
as a tortoise draws its limbs into its shell.  
Independent, not disturbing others,  
someone who’s extinguished wouldn’t blame anyone.”

1"Bhūtapubbaṁ, bhikkhave, kummo kacchapo sāyanhasamayaṁ anunadītīre gocarapasuto ahosi. Siṅgālopi kho, bhikkhave, sāyanhasamayaṁ anunadītīre gocarapasuto ahosi. Addasā kho, bhikkhave, kummo kacchapo siṅgālaṁ dūratova gocarapasutaṁ. Disvāna soṇḍipañcamāni aṅgāni sake kapāle samodahitvā appossukko tuṇhībhūto saṅkasāyati.

Siṅgālopi kho, bhikkhave, addasa kummaṁ kacchapaṁ dūratova gocarapasutaṁ. Disvāna yena kummo kacchapo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā kummaṁ kacchapaṁ paccupaṭṭhito ahosi: ‘yadāyaṁ kummo kacchapo soṇḍipañcamānaṁ aṅgānaṁ aññataraṁ vā aññataraṁ vā aṅgaṁ abhininnāmessati, tattheva naṁ gahetvā uddālitvā khādissāmī’ti.

Yadā kho, bhikkhave, kummo kacchapo soṇḍipañcamānaṁ aṅgānaṁ aññataraṁ vā aññataraṁ vā aṅgaṁ na abhininnāmi, atha siṅgālo kummamhā nibbijja pakkāmi, otāraṁ alabhamāno.


2Evameva kho, bhikkhave, tumhepi māro pāpimā sātataṁ samitaṁ paccupaṭṭhito: ‘appeva nāmāhaṁ imesaṁ cakkhuto vā otāraṁ labheyyaṁ … pe … jivhāto vā otāraṁ labheyyaṁ … pe … manato vā otāraṁ labheyyan’ti. Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, indriyesu guttadvārā vihāratha.

Cakkhunā rūpaṁ disvā mā nimittaggāhino ahuvattha, mā anubyañjanaggāhino. Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṁ cakkhundriyaṁ asaṁvutaṁ vihārantaṁ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṁ, tassa saṁvarāya paṭipajjatha, rakkhatha cakkhundriyaṁ, cakkhundriye saṁvaraṁ āpajjatha.


Sotena saddaṁ sutvā … ghānena gandhaṁ ghāyitvā … jivhāya rasaṁ sāyitvā … kāyena phoṭṭhabbaṁ phusitvā … manasā dhammaṁ viññāya mā nimittaggāhino ahuvattha, mā anubyañjanaggāhino. Yatvādhikaraṇamenaṁ manindriyaṁ asaṁvutaṁ vihārantaṁ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvāssaveyyuṁ, tassa saṁvarāya paṭipajjatha, rakkhatha manindriyaṁ, manindriye saṁvaraṁ āpajjatha.

Yato tumhe, bhikkhave, indriyesu guttadvārā viharissatha, atha tumhehipi māro pāpimā nibbijja pakkamissati, otāraṁ alabhamāno – kummamhāva siṅgāloti.


3Kummova aṅgāni sake kapāle,  
Samodahaṁ bhikkhu manovitakke;  
Anissito aññamaheṭhayāno,  
Parinibbuto nūpavadeyya kañcī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.240-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA1167]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA1167]], [[SN35.120]], [[MN39]], [[SN35.127]], [[AN3.16]], [[AN4.37]], [[DN2]], [[DN3]], [[DN4]], [[DN5]], [[DN6]], [[DN7]], [[DN8]], [[DN9]], [[DN10]], [[DN11]], [[DN12]], [[DN13]], [[MN27]], [[MN38]], [[MN51]], [[MN53]], [[MN60]], [[MN76]], [[MN79]], [[MN94]], [[MN101]], [[MN107]], [[MN112]], [[AN4.14]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN4.198]], [[AN5.76]], [[AN5.140]], [[AN10.99]], [[AN11.17]], [[MN33]], [[SN1.17]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN1.17]], [[SN35.228]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.240]]
> ◄  [[sn35.239-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.241-sujato-pali]] ►
