---
sutta_code: "SN35.104"
sutta_title:
  - "Yogakkhemisutta "
  - "Secure from Bondage"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.104]]
> ◄  [[sn35.103-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.105-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XI. Sanctuary — SN35.104: Sanctuary
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching, an explanation of one who has reached sanctuary. Listen …

And what is an exposition of the teaching, an explanation of one who has reached sanctuary?

There are sights known by the eye that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. The Realized One has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. He teaches meditation for giving them up. That’s why the Realized One is called one who has reached sanctuary. …

There are thoughts known by the mind that are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. The Realized One has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. He teaches meditation for giving them up. That’s why the Realized One is called one who has reached sanctuary.

This is an exposition of the teaching, an explanation of one who has reached sanctuary.”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

"Yogakkhemipariyāyaṁ vo, bhikkhave, dhammapariyāyaṁ desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, yogakkhemipariyāyo dhammapariyāyo?

Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Te tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṁ anup pāda dhammā. Tesañca pahānāya akkhāsi yogaṁ, tasmā tathāgato ‘yogakkhemī’ti vuccati … pe …

… santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā iṭṭhā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmūpasaṁhitā rajanīyā. Te tathāgatassa pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvaṅkatā āyatiṁ anup pāda dhammā. Tesañca pahānāya akkhāsi yogaṁ, tasmā tathāgato ‘yogakkhemī’ti vuccati.

Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhave, yogakkhemipariyāyo dhammapariyāyo"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.104-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 105 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.49]], [[AN150]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.104]]
> ◄  [[sn35.103-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.105-sujato-pali]] ►
