---
sutta_code: "SN35.156"
sutta_title:
  - "Ajjhattanandikkhayasutta "
  - "The Destruction of Delight (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.156]]
> ◄  [[sn35.155-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.157-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XVI. The End of Relishing — SN35.156: The Interior and the End of Relishing
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, the eye really is impermanent. A bhikkhu sees that it is impermanent: that’s their right view. Seeing rightly, they grow disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be well freed. The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind really is impermanent. A bhikkhu sees that it is impermanent: that’s their right view. Seeing rightly, they grow disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be well freed.”

1"Aniccaṁyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu cakkhuṁ aniccanti passati, sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. Sammā passaṁ nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṁ suvimuttanti vuccati … pe … aniccaṁyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu jivhaṁ aniccanti passati, sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. Sammā passaṁ nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā … pe … cittaṁ suvimuttanti vuccati … pe … aniccaṁyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu manaṁ aniccanti passati, sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. Sammā passaṁ nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṁ suvimuttanti vuccatī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.156-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA188]] | S iv 150 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA188]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.156]]
> ◄  [[sn35.155-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.157-sujato-pali]] ►
