---
sutta_code: "SN35.22"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyadukkhup pāda sutta "
  - "Arising of Suffering (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.22]]
> ◄  [[sn35.21-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.23-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### II. Pairs — SN35.22: The Arising of Suffering (Exterior)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of sights is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death.

2The cessation, settling, and ending of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and thoughts is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.”


1"Yo, bhikkhave, rūpānaṁ uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. Yo saddānaṁ … pe … yo gandhānaṁ … yo rasānaṁ … yo phoṭṭhabbānaṁ … yo dhammānaṁ uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo.

2Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpānaṁ nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. Yo saddānaṁ … pe … yo gandhānaṁ … yo rasānaṁ … yo phoṭṭhabbānaṁ … yo dhammānaṁ nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo"ti.


Dasamaṁ.  
Yamakavaggo dutiyo.

3Sambodhena duve vuttā,  
Assādena apare duve;  
No cetena duve vuttā,  
Abhinandena apare duve;  
Uppādena duve vuttā,  
Vaggo tena pavuccatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.22-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA192-193]] | S iv 14 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA192-193]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.22]]
> ◄  [[sn35.21-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.23-sujato-pali]] ►
