---
sutta_code: "SN35.73"
sutta_title:
  - "Tatiyachaphassāyatanasutta "
  - "The Six Bases for Contact (3)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.73]]
> ◄  [[sn35.72-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.74-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### VII. With Migajāla — SN35.73: Six Fields of Contact (3rd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, anyone who doesn’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape has not completed the spiritual journey and is far from this teaching and training.”

2When he said this, one of the bhikkhus said to the Buddha: “Here, sir, I’m lost, truly lost. For I don’t truly understand the six fields of contacts’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.”

3“What do you think, bhikkhu? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?”


4“Impermanent, sir.”

5“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

6“Suffering, sir.”

7“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and liable to fall apart, is it fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

8“No, sir.”

9“Is the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind permanent or impermanent?”

10“Impermanent, sir.”

11“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

12“Suffering, sir.”


13“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and liable to fall apart, is it fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

14“No, sir.”


15“Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”


1"Yo hi koci, bhikkhave, bhikkhu channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāti. Avusitaṁ tena brahmacariyaṁ, ārakā so imasmā dhammavinayā"ti.

2Evaṁ vutte, aññataro bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: "etthāhaṁ, bhante, anassasaṁ panassasaṁ. Ahañhi, bhante, channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāmī"ti.

3"Taṁ kiṁ maññasi, bhikkhu, cakkhu niccaṁ vā aniccaṁ vā"ti?


4"Aniccaṁ, bhante".

5"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vā taṁ sukhaṁ vā"ti?

6"Dukkhaṁ, bhante".

7"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ, kallaṁ nu taṁ samanupassituṁ: ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’"ti?

8"No hetaṁ, bhante".

9"Sotaṁ … ghānaṁ … jivhā … kāyo … mano nicco vā anicco vā"ti?

10"Anicco, bhante".

11"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vā taṁ sukhaṁ vā"ti?

12"Dukkhaṁ, bhante".


13"Yaṁ panāniccaṁ dukkhaṁ vipariṇāmadhammaṁ, kallaṁ nu taṁ samanupassituṁ: ‘etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’"ti?

14"No hetaṁ, bhante".


15"Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhu, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati, sotasmimpi nibbindati, ghānasmimpi nibbindati, jivhāyapi nibbindati, kāyasmimpi nibbindati, manasmimpi nibbindati. Nibbindaṁ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṁ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṁ hoti.

‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.


Ekādasamaṁ.

Migajālavaggo dutiyo.

16Migajālena dve vuttā,  
Cattāro ca samiddhinā;  
Upaseno upavāṇo,  
Chaphassāyatanikā tayoti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.73-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA209]] | S iv 64 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA209]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.73]]
> ◄  [[sn35.72-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.74-sujato-pali]] ►
