---
sutta_code: "SN35.113"
sutta_title:
  - "Upassutisutta "
  - "Listening In"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.113]]
> ◄  [[sn35.112-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.114-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XI. Sanctuary — SN35.113: Listening In
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the Buddha was staying at Nādika in the brick house. Then while the Buddha was in private retreat he spoke this exposition of the teaching:

“Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights.

The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition that gives rise to old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. Ear … nose … tongue … body … Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and thoughts.

The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition that gives rise to old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.


2Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights.

The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases with nothing left over, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. Ear … nose … tongue … body … Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and thoughts.

The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases with nothing left over, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases … That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”


3Now at that time a certain bhikkhu was standing listening in on the Buddha. The Buddha saw him and said: “bhikkhu, did you hear that exposition of the teaching?”

“Yes, sir.”


“Learn that exposition of the teaching, memorize it, and remember it. That exposition of the teaching is beneficial and relates to the fundamentals of the spiritual life.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā nātike vihārati giñjakāvasathe. Atha kho bhagavā rahogato paṭisallīno imaṁ dhammapariyāyaṁ abhāsi:

"cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṁ.

Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā; vedanāpaccayā taṇhā; taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṁ; upādānapaccayā bhavo; bhavapaccayā jāti; jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. Jivhañca paṭicca rase ca uppajjati … pe … manañca paṭicca dhamme ca uppajjati manoviññāṇaṁ.

Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā; vedanāpaccayā taṇhā; taṇhāpaccayā upādānaṁ; upādānapaccayā bhavo; bhavapaccayā jāti; jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.


2Cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṁ.

Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā; vedanāpaccayā taṇhā. Tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodhā upādānanirodho; upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho; bhavanirodhā jātinirodho; jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā nirujjhanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hoti … pe … jivhañca paṭicca rase ca uppajjati … pe … manañca paṭicca dhamme ca uppajjati manoviññāṇaṁ.

Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā; vedanāpaccayā taṇhā. Tassāyeva taṇhāya asesavirāganirodhā upādānanirodho; upādānanirodhā … pe … evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī"ti.


3Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu bhagavato upassuti ṭhito hoti. Addasā kho bhagavā taṁ bhikkhuṁ upassuti ṭhitaṁ. Disvāna taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavoca: "assosi no tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ dhammapariyāyan"ti?

"Evaṁ, bhante".


"Uggaṇhāhi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ dhammapariyāyaṁ. Pariyāpuṇāhi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ dhammapariyāyaṁ. Dhārehi tvaṁ, bhikkhu, imaṁ dhammapariyāyaṁ. Atthasañhitoyaṁ, bhikkhu, dhammapariyāyo ādibrahmacariyako"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Yogakkhemivaggo paṭhamo.

4Yogakkhemi upādāya,  
Dukkhaṁ loko ca seyyo ca;  
Saṁyojanaṁ upādānaṁ,  
Dve parijānaṁ upassutīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.113-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 115 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN12.45]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.113]]
> ◄  [[sn35.112-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.114-sujato-pali]] ►
