---
sutta_code: "SN35.140"
sutta_title:
  - "Ajjhattaaniccahetusutta "
  - "Impermanent with Cause Internal"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.140]]
> ◄  [[sn35.139-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.141-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIV. At Devadaha — SN35.140: Interior and Cause Are Impermanent
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the eye is impermanent. The cause and condition that gives rise to the eye is also impermanent. Since the eye is produced by what is impermanent, how could it be permanent? The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is impermanent. The cause and condition that gives rise to the mind is also impermanent. Since the mind is produced by what is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”

1"Cakkhuṁ, bhikkhave, aniccaṁ. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo cakkhussa uppādāya, sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, cakkhu kuto niccaṁ bhavissati … pe … jivhā aniccā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo jivhāya uppādāya sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūtā, bhikkhave, jivhā kuto niccā bhavissati … pe … mano anicco. Yopi, bhikkhave, hetu yopi paccayo manassa uppādāya, sopi anicco. Aniccasambhūto, bhikkhave, mano kuto nicco bhavissati.

Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati … pe … jivhāyapi nibbindati … pe … manasmimpi nibbindati, nibbindaṁ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimuttasmiṁ vimuttamiti ñāṇaṁ hoti.

‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.140-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 142 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.18]], [[SN22.19]], [[SN22.20]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.140]]
> ◄  [[sn35.139-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.141-sujato-pali]] ►
