---
sutta_code: "SN35.21"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamadukkhup pāda sutta "
  - "Arising of Suffering (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.21]]
> ◄  [[sn35.20-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.22-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### II. Pairs — SN35.21: The Arising of Suffering (Interior)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the eye is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the ear … nose … tongue … body … and mind is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death.

2The cessation, settling, and ending of the eye is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending of the ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death.”

1"Yo, bhikkhave, cakkhussa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo. Yo sotassa … pe … yo ghānassa … yo jivhāya … yo kāyassa … yo manassa uppādo ṭhiti abhinibbatti pātubhāvo, dukkhasseso uppādo, rogānaṁ ṭhiti, jarāmaraṇassa pātubhāvo.

2Yo ca kho, bhikkhave, cakkhussa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo. Yo sotassa … yo ghānassa … yo jivhāya … yo kāyassa … yo manassa nirodho vūpasamo atthaṅgamo, dukkhasseso nirodho, rogānaṁ vūpasamo, jarāmaraṇassa atthaṅgamo"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.21-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA192-193]] | S iv 14 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA192-193]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.21]]
> ◄  [[sn35.20-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.22-sujato-pali]] ►
