---
sutta_code: "SN35.141"
sutta_title:
  - "Ajjhattadukkhahetusutta "
  - "Suffering with Cause Internal"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.141]]
> ◄  [[sn35.140-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.142-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIV. At Devadaha — SN35.141: Interior and Cause Are Suffering
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, the eye is suffering. The cause and condition that gives rise to the eye is also suffering. Since the eye is produced by what is suffering, how could it be happiness? The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is suffering. The cause and condition that gives rise to the mind is also suffering. Since the mind is produced by what is suffering, how could it be happiness?

Seeing this … They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”

1"Cakkhuṁ, bhikkhave, dukkhaṁ. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo cakkhussa uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūtaṁ, bhikkhave, cakkhu kuto sukhaṁ bhavissati … pe … jivhā dukkhā. Yopi hetu, yopi paccayo jivhāya uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūtā, bhikkhave, jivhā kuto sukhā bhavissati … pe … mano dukkho. Yopi hetu yopi paccayo manassa uppādāya, sopi dukkho. Dukkhasambhūto, bhikkhave, mano kuto sukho bhavissati.

Evaṁ passaṁ … pe … nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānātī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.141-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 142 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN22.18]], [[SN22.19]], [[SN22.20]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.141]]
> ◄  [[sn35.140-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.142-sujato-pali]] ►
