---
sutta_code: "SN35.60"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.60]]
> ◄  [[sn35.59-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.61-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### VI. Ignorance — SN35.60: The Complete Understanding of All Grasping
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping. Listen …

And what is the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping?

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, and feeling. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they are released, they understand: ‘I have completely understood grasping.’


Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds. …

Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells. …

Tongue consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and tastes. …

Body consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. …

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and thoughts. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling.


Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the mind, thoughts, mind consciousness, mind contact, and feeling. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they are released, they understand: ‘I have completely understood grasping.’

This is the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping.”

1"Sabbupādānapariññāya vo, bhikkhave, dhammaṁ desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sabbupādānapariññāya dhammo?

Cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṁ. Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā.

Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako cakkhusmimpi nibbindati, rūpesupi nibbindati, cakkhuviññāṇepi nibbindati, cakkhusamphassepi nibbindati, vedanāyapi nibbindati. Nibbindaṁ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimokkhā ‘pariññātaṁ me upādānan’ti pajānāti.


Sotañca paṭicca sadde ca uppajjati … ghānañca paṭicca gandhe ca … jivhañca paṭicca rase ca … kāyañca paṭicca phoṭṭhabbe ca … manañca paṭicca dhamme ca uppajjati manoviññāṇaṁ. Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso. Phassapaccayā vedanā.


Evaṁ passaṁ, bhikkhave, sutavā ariyasāvako manasmimpi nibbindati, dhammesupi nibbindati, manoviññāṇepi nibbindati, manosamphassepi nibbindati, vedanāyapi nibbindati. Nibbindaṁ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati; vimokkhā ‘pariññātaṁ me upādānan’ti pajānāti.

Ayaṁ kho, bhikkhave, sabbupādānapariññāya dhammo"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.60-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.60]]
> ◄  [[sn35.59-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.61-sujato-pali]] ►
