---
sutta_code: "SN35.157"
sutta_title:
  - "Bāhiranandikkhayasutta "
  - "The Destruction of Delight (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.157]]
> ◄  [[sn35.156-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.158-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XVI. The End of Relishing — SN35.157: The Exterior and the End of Relishing
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1“bhikkhus, sights really are impermanent. A bhikkhu sees that they are impermanent: that’s their right view. Seeing rightly, they grow disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be well freed.

Sounds … Smells … Tastes … Touches … Thoughts really are impermanent. A bhikkhu sees that they are impermanent: that’s their right view. Seeing rightly, they grow disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be well freed.”

1"Anicceyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu rūpe aniccāti passati, sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. Sammā passaṁ nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṁ suvimuttanti vuccati.

Anicceyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sadde … gandhe … rase … phoṭṭhabbe … dhamme aniccāti passati, sāssa hoti sammādiṭṭhi. Sammā passaṁ nibbindati. Nandikkhayā rāgakkhayo; rāgakkhayā nandikkhayo. Nandirāgakkhayā cittaṁ suvimuttanti vuccatī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.157-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA188]] | S iv 150 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA188]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.157]]
> ◄  [[sn35.156-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.158-sujato-pali]] ►
