---
sutta_code: "SN35.134"
sutta_title:
  - "Devadahasutta "
  - "At Devadaha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.134]]
> ◄  [[sn35.133-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.135-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 35. Saḷāyatanasaṁyutta: On the Six Sense Fields

### XIV. At Devadaha — SN35.134: At Devadaha
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near the Sakyan town named Devadaha. There the Buddha addressed the bhikkhus:

“When it comes to the six fields of contact, bhikkhus, I don’t say that all bhikkhus have work to do with diligence, nor do I say that none of them have work to do with diligence.

I say that, when it comes to the six fields of contact, bhikkhus don’t have work to do with diligence if they are perfected, with defilements ended, having completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and become rightly freed through enlightenment. Why is that?

They’ve done their work with diligence, and are incapable of negligence.


I say that, when it comes to the six fields of contact, bhikkhus do have work to do with diligence if they are trainees, who haven’t achieved their heart’s desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary. Why is that?

There are sights known by the eye that are pleasant and also those that are unpleasant. Though experiencing them again and again they don’t occupy the mind. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi. Seeing this fruit of diligence, I say that those bhikkhus have work to do with diligence when it comes to the six fields of contact. … There are thoughts known by the mind that are pleasant and also those that are unpleasant. Though experiencing them again and again they don’t occupy the mind. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi. Seeing this fruit of diligence, I say that those bhikkhus have work to do with diligence when it comes to the six fields of contact.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sakkesu vihārati devadahaṁ nāma sakyānaṁ nigamo. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi:

"Nāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sabbesaṁyeva bhikkhūnaṁ chasu phassāyatanesu appamādena karaṇīyanti vadāmi, na ca panāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sabbesaṁyeva bhikkhūnaṁ chasu phassāyatanesu nāppamādena karaṇīyanti vadāmi.

Ye te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū arahanto khīṇāsavā vusitavanto katakaraṇīyā ohitabhārā anuppattasadatthā parikkhīṇabhavasaṁyojanā sammadaññāvimuttā, tesāhaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṁ chasu phassāyatanesu nāppamādena karaṇīyanti vadāmi. Taṁ kissa hetu?

Kataṁ tesaṁ appamādena, abhabbā te pamajjituṁ.


Ye ca kho te, bhikkhave, bhikkhū sekkhā appattamānasā anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ patthayamānā vihāranti, tesāhaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṁ chasu phassāyatanesu appamādena karaṇīyanti vadāmi. Taṁ kissa hetu?

Santi, bhikkhave, cakkhuviññeyyā rūpā manoramāpi, amanoramāpi. Tyāssa phussa phussa cittaṁ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhanti. Cetaso apariyādānā āraddhaṁ hoti vīriyaṁ asallīnaṁ, upaṭṭhitā sati asammuṭṭhā, passaddho kāyo asāraddho, samāhitaṁ cittaṁ ekaggaṁ. Imaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhikkhave, appamādaphalaṁ sampassamāno tesaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ chasu phassāyatanesu appamādena karaṇīyanti vadāmi … pe … santi, bhikkhave, manoviññeyyā dhammā manoramāpi amanoramāpi. Tyāssa phussa phussa cittaṁ na pariyādāya tiṭṭhanti. Cetaso apariyādānā āraddhaṁ hoti vīriyaṁ asallīnaṁ, upaṭṭhitā sati asammuṭṭhā, passaddho kāyo asāraddho, samāhitaṁ cittaṁ ekaggaṁ. Imaṁ khvāhaṁ, bhikkhave, appamādaphalaṁ sampassamāno tesaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ chasu phassāyatanesu appamādena karaṇīyanti vadāmī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.134-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA212]] | S iv 136 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA212]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.134]]
> ◄  [[sn35.133-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn35.135-sujato-pali]] ►
