---
sutta_code: "AN10.14"
sutta_title:
  - "Cetokhila "
  - "Emotional Barrenness"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.14]]
> ◄  [[an10.13-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.15-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.14 Mental Barrenness

> **Division:** II. PROTECTOR

“Bhikkhus, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has not abandoned five kinds of mental barrenness and eradicated five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only deterioration in wholesome qualities and not growth is to be expected for this person.

“What are the five kinds of mental barrenness that he has not abandoned?

(1) “Here, a bhikkhu is perplexed about the Teacher, doubts him, is not convinced about him and does not place confidence in him. When a bhikkhu is perplexed about the Teacher, doubts him, is not convinced about him and does not place confidence in him, his mind does not incline to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving. Since his mind does not incline to ardor … \[18\] … and striving, this is the first kind of mental barrenness that he has not abandoned.

(2)–(5) “Again, a bhikkhu is perplexed about the Dhamma … perplexed about the Saṅgha … perplexed about the training … is irritated by his fellow bhikkhus, displeased with them, aggressive toward them, ill disposed toward them. When a bhikkhu is irritated by his fellow bhikkhus, displeased with them, aggressive toward them, ill disposed toward them, his mind does not incline to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving. Since his mind does not incline to ardor … and striving, this is the fifth kind of mental barrenness that he has not abandoned.

“These are the five kinds of mental barrenness that he has not abandoned.

“What are the five bondages of the mind that he has not eradicated?

(6) “Here, a bhikkhu is not devoid of lust for sensual pleasures, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for them. When a bhikkhu is not devoid of lust for sensual pleasures, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for them, his mind does not incline to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving. Since his mind does not incline to ardor … and striving, this is the first bondage of the mind that he has not eradicated.

(7)–(10) “Again, a bhikkhu is not devoid of lust for the body, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for it…. He is not devoid of lust for form, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for it…. Having eaten as much as he wants until his belly is full, he is intent upon the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep … he lives the spiritual life aspiring for \[rebirth in\] a certain order of devas, \[thinking\]: ‘By this virtuous behavior, observance, austerity, or spiritual life I will be a deva or one \[in the retinue\] of the devas.’ When he lives the spiritual life aspiring for \[rebirth in\] a certain order of devas … his mind does not incline \[19\] to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving. Since his mind does not incline to ardor … and striving, this is the fifth bondage of the mind that he has not eradicated.

“These are the five bondages of mind that he has not eradicated.

“If any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has not abandoned these five kinds of mental barrenness and eradicated these five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only deterioration and not growth in wholesome qualities is to be expected for that person. Just as during the dark fortnight, whether night or day comes, the moon only deteriorates in beauty, roundness, and brightness, in diameter and circumference, so too, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has not abandoned these five kinds of mental barrenness … only deterioration … is to be expected for that person.

“Bhikkhus, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has abandoned five kinds of mental barrenness and eradicated five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only growth in wholesome qualities and not deterioration is to be expected for that person.

“And what are the five kinds of mental barrenness that he has abandoned?

(1) “Here, a bhikkhu is not perplexed about the Teacher, does not doubt him, is convinced about him and places confidence in him. When a bhikkhu is not perplexed about the Teacher, does not doubt him, is convinced about him and places confidence in him, his mind inclines to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving. Since his mind inclines to ardor … and striving, this is the first kind of mental barrenness that he has abandoned.

(2)–(5) “Again, a bhikkhu is not perplexed about the Dhamma … not perplexed about the Saṅgha … not perplexed about the training \[20\] … is not irritated by his fellow bhikkhus, is pleased with them, not aggressive toward them, well disposed toward them. When a bhikkhu is not irritated by his fellow bhikkhus … well disposed toward them, his mind inclines to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving. Since his mind inclines to ardor … and striving, this is the fifth kind of mental barrenness that he has abandoned.

“These are the five kinds of mental barrenness that he has abandoned.

“What are the five bondages of the mind that he has well eradicated?

(6) “Here, a bhikkhu is devoid of lust for sensual pleasures, devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for them. When a bhikkhu is devoid of lust for sensual pleasures, devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for them, his mind inclines to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving. Since his mind inclines to ardor … and striving, this is the first bondage of the mind that he has well eradicated.

(7)–(10) “Again, a bhikkhu is devoid of lust for the body, devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for it…. He is devoid of lust for form, devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for it…. He does not eat as much as he wants until his belly is full nor is he intent upon the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep…. He does not live the spiritual life aspiring for \[rebirth in\] a certain order of devas, \[thinking\]: ‘By this virtuous behavior, observance, austerity, or spiritual life I will be a deva or one \[in the retinue\] of the devas.’ Since he does not live the spiritual life aspiring for \[rebirth in\] a certain order of devas … his mind inclines to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving. Since his mind inclines to ardor … and striving, this is the fifth bondage of the mind that he has well eradicated.

“These are the five bondages of the mind that he has well eradicated.

“If any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has abandoned these five kinds of mental barrenness and well eradicated these five bondages of the mind, \[21\] then, whether night or day comes, only growth in wholesome qualities and not deterioration is to be expected for that person. Just as during the bright fortnight, whether night or day comes, the moon only increases in beauty, roundness, and brightness, in diameter and circumference, so too, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has abandoned these five kinds of mental barrenness and well eradicated these five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only growth in wholesome qualities and not deterioration is to be expected for that person.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.14-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA51.4]], [[MA206]] | A v 17 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN5.205]], [[DN33]], [[AN9.71]], [[MN16]], [[DN34]], [[DA10]], [[EA51.4]], [[MA206]], [[AN5.206]], [[AN9.72]], [[AN9.82]], [[AN9.92]], [[AN10.14]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.14]]
> ◄  [[an10.13-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.15-bodhi]] ►
