---
sutta_code: "AN10.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Senāsana "
  - "Lodgings"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.11]]
> ◄  [[an10.10-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.12-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.11 Lodging

> **Division:** II. PROTECTOR

“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu who possesses five factors resorts to and uses a lodging that possesses five factors, in no long time, with the destruction of the taints, he might realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.

“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu possess five factors?

(1) “Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith. He has faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’

(2) “He is seldom ill or afflicted, possessing an even digestion that is neither too cool nor too hot but moderate and suitable for striving.

(3) “He is honest and open, one who reveals himself as he really is to the Teacher and his wise fellow bhikkhus.

(4) “He has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.

(5) “He is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.

“It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses five factors.

“And how does a lodging possess five factors?

(6) “Here, the lodging is neither too far \[from a place for alms\] nor too close, and it possesses a means for going and returning.

(7) “During the day it is not disturbed by people and at night it is quiet and still.

(8) “There is little contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and serpents.

(9) “One dwelling in that lodging can easily obtain robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.

(10) “In that lodging elder bhikkhus are dwelling who are learned, heirs to the heritage, \[16\] experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines. He approaches them from time to time and inquires: ‘How is this, Bhante? What is the meaning of this?’ Those venerable ones then disclose to him what has not been disclosed, clear up what is obscure, and dispel his perplexity about numerous perplexing points.

“It is in this way that a lodging possesses five factors.

“When a bhikkhu who possesses these five factors resorts to and uses a lodging that possesses these five factors, in no long time, with the destruction of the taints, he might realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 15 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.11]]
> ◄  [[an10.10-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.12-bodhi]] ►
