---
sutta_code: "AN10.44"
sutta_title:
  - "Kusināra "
  - "At Kusinara"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.44]]
> ◄  [[an10.43-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.45-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.44 Kusinārā

> **Division:** V. INSULTS

On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kusinārā, in the forest thicket of oblations. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: “Bhikkhus!”

“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another person should examine himself with respect to five things and establish five things in himself before he reproves the other person. With respect to what five things should he examine himself?

(1) “Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another should examine himself thus: ‘Is my bodily behavior pure? Do I possess bodily behavior that is pure, flawless, and irreproachable? Does this quality exist in me or not?’ If the bhikkhu’s bodily behavior is not pure, and he does not possess bodily behavior that is pure, flawless, and irreproachable, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first train yourself bodily.’ There will be those who say this to him.

(2) “Again, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another should examine himself thus: ‘Is my verbal behavior pure? Do I possess verbal behavior that is pure, flawless, and irreproachable? Does this quality exist in me or not?’ If the bhikkhu’s verbal behavior is not pure, and he does not possess verbal behavior that is pure, flawless, and irreproachable, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first train yourself verbally.’ There will be those who say this to him. \[80\]

(3) “Again, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another should examine himself thus: ‘Have I established a mind of loving-kindness without resentment toward my fellow bhikkhus? Does this quality exist in me or not?’ If the bhikkhu has not established a mind of loving-kindness without resentment toward his fellow bhikkhus, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first establish a mind of loving-kindness toward your fellow bhikkhus.’ There will be those who say this to him.

(4) “Again, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another should examine himself thus: ‘Am I learned, and do I retain and preserve what I have learned? Have I learned much of those teachings that are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, which proclaim the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life? Have I retained them in mind, recited them verbally, mentally investigated them, and penetrated them well by view? Does this quality exist in me or not?’ If the bhikkhu is not learned … and has not penetrated them well by view, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first learn the heritage.’ There will be those who say this to him.

(5) “Again, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another should examine himself thus: ‘Have both Pātimokkhas been well transmitted to me in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication? Does there exist in me this quality or not?’ If both Pātimokkhas \[81\] have not been well transmitted to him in detail … in terms of the rules and their detailed explication, and if, when asked: ‘Where did the Blessed One state this?’ he is unable to reply, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first learn the discipline.’ There will be those who say this to him.

“It is with respect to these five things that he should examine himself.

“And what are the five things that he should establish in himself? \[He should consider:\] ‘(6) I will speak at a proper time, not at an improper time; (7) I will speak truthfully, not falsely; (8) I will speak gently, not harshly; (9) I will speak in a beneficial way, not in a harmful way; (10) I will speak with a mind of loving-kindness, not while harboring hatred.’ These are the five things that he should establish in himself.

“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another person should examine himself with respect to these five things and establish these five things in himself before he reproves the other person.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.44-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 79 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-SS13]], [[PLI-TV-KD19]], [[PLI-TV-PVR17]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.44]]
> ◄  [[an10.43-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.45-bodhi]] ►
