---
sutta_code: "AN10.88"
sutta_title:
  - "Akkosaka "
  - "Abuser"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.88]]
> ◄  [[an10.87-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.89-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.88 One Who Insults

> **Division:** IV. THE ELDERS

“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one who insults and disparages his fellow bhikkhus, a reviler of the noble ones, it is impossible and inconceivable that he will not incur at least one of these ten disasters. What ten? (1) He does not achieve what he has not yet achieved. (2) He falls away from what he has achieved. (3) His good qualities are not polished. (4) He overestimates his good qualities, or (5) leads the spiritual life dissatisfied, or (6) commits a certain defiled offense, or (7) contracts a severe illness, or (8) goes mad and becomes mentally deranged. (9) He dies confused. (10) With the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell. When a bhikkhu is one who insults and disparages his fellow bhikkhus, a reviler of the noble ones, it is impossible and inconceivable that he will not incur at least one of these ten disasters.” \[170\]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.88-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 169 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN11.6]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.89]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.88]]
> ◄  [[an10.87-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.89-bodhi]] ►
