---
sutta_code: "AN10.87"
sutta_title:
  - "Nappiya "
  - "Disciplinary Issues"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.87]]
> ◄  [[an10.86-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.88-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.87 Disciplinary Issues

> **Division:** IV. THE ELDERS

There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus with reference to the bhikkhu Kalandaka: “Bhikkhus!”

“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.

The Blessed One said this:

(1) “Here, a bhikkhu is a maker of disciplinary issues and he does not speak in praise of the settlement of disciplinary issues. When a bhikkhu is a maker of disciplinary issues and does not speak in praise of the settlement of disciplinary issues, this is a quality that does not lead to affection, respect, esteem, accord, or unity. \[165\]

(2) “Again, a bhikkhu does not desire training and he does not speak in praise of undertaking the training. When a bhikkhu does not desire training … this, too, is a quality that does not lead to … unity.

(3) “Again, a bhikkhu has evil desires and he does not speak in praise of the removal of desire. When a bhikkhu has evil desires … this, too, is a quality that does not lead to … unity.

(4) “Again, a bhikkhu is prone to anger and he does not speak in praise of the removal of anger. When a bhikkhu is prone to anger … this, too, is a quality that does not lead to … unity.

(5) “Again, a bhikkhu is one who denigrates \[others\] and he does not speak in praise of the removal of denigration. When a bhikkhu is one who denigrates … this, too, is a quality that does not lead to … unity.

(6) “Again, a bhikkhu is crafty and he does not speak in praise of the removal of craftiness. When a bhikkhu is crafty … this, too, is a quality that does not lead to … unity.

(7) “Again, a bhikkhu is deceitful and he does not speak in praise of the removal of deceitfulness. When a bhikkhu is deceitful … this, too, is a quality that does not lead to … unity. \[166\]

(8) “Again, a bhikkhu is not inclined to pay attention to teachings and he does not speak in praise of paying attention to teachings. When a bhikkhu is not inclined to pay attention to teachings … this, too, is a quality that does not lead to … unity.

(9) “Again, a bhikkhu is not inclined to seclusion and he does not speak in praise of seclusion. When a bhikkhu is not inclined to seclusion … this, too, is a quality that does not lead to … unity.

(10) “Again, a bhikkhu does not show hospitality to his fellow bhikkhus and he does not speak in praise of one who shows hospitality. When a bhikkhu does not show hospitality to his fellow bhikkhus and he does not speak in praise of one who shows hospitality, this, too, is a quality that does not lead to affection, respect, esteem, accord, or unity.

“Although such a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Oh, if only my fellow bhikkhus would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!’ yet his fellow bhikkhus do not honor, respect, esteem, and venerate him. For what reason? Because his wise fellow bhikkhus see that he has not abandoned those bad unwholesome qualities.

“Suppose a wild colt would wish: ‘Oh, if only people would assign me a thoroughbred’s place, feed me a thoroughbred’s food, and give me a thoroughbred’s grooming!’ yet people do not assign him a thoroughbred’s place, feed him a thoroughbred’s food, and give him a thoroughbred’s grooming. \[167\] For what reason? Because wise people see that he has not abandoned his tricks, ploys, gambits, and wiles. So too, although such a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Oh, if only my fellow bhikkhus would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!’ yet his fellow bhikkhus do not honor, respect, esteem, and venerate him. For what reason? Because his wise fellow bhikkhus see that he has not abandoned those bad unwholesome qualities.

(1) “But a bhikkhu is not a maker of disciplinary issues and he speaks in praise of the settlement of disciplinary issues. When a bhikkhu is not a maker of disciplinary issues and speaks in praise of the settlement of disciplinary issues, this is a quality that leads to affection, respect, esteem, accord, and unity.

(2) “Again, a bhikkhu desires training and he speaks in praise of undertaking the training. When a bhikkhu desires training … this, too, is a quality that leads to … unity.

(3) “Again, a bhikkhu has few desires and he speaks in praise of the removal of desire. When a bhikkhu has few desires … this, too, is a quality that leads to … unity.

(4) “Again, a bhikkhu is not prone to anger and he speaks in praise of the removal of anger. When a bhikkhu is not prone to anger … this, too, is a quality that leads to … unity.

(5) “Again, a bhikkhu is not one who denigrates \[others\] and he speaks in praise of the removal of denigration. When a bhikkhu is not one who denigrates \[others\] … this, too, is a quality that leads to … unity. \[168\]

(6) “Again, a bhikkhu is not crafty and he speaks in praise of the removal of craftiness. When a bhikkhu is not crafty … this, too, is a quality that leads to … unity.

(7) “Again, a bhikkhu is not deceitful and he speaks in praise of the removal of deceitfulness. When a bhikkhu is not deceitful … this, too, is a quality that leads to … unity.

(8) “Again, a bhikkhu is inclined to attend to teachings and he speaks in praise of attending to teachings. When a bhikkhu is inclined to attend to teachings … this, too, is a quality that leads to … unity.

(9) “Again, a bhikkhu is inclined to seclusion and he speaks in praise of seclusion. When a bhikkhu is inclined to seclusion … this, too, is a quality that leads to … unity.

(10) “Again, a bhikkhu shows hospitality to his fellow bhikkhus and he speaks in praise of one who shows hospitality. When a bhikkhu shows hospitality to his fellow bhikkhus and he speaks in praise of one who shows hospitality, this, too, is a quality that leads to affection, respect, esteem, accord, and unity.

“Although such a bhikkhu might not wish: ‘Oh, if only my fellow bhikkhus would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!’ yet his fellow bhikkhus honor, respect, esteem, and venerate him. For what reason? Because his wise fellow bhikkhus see that he has abandoned those bad unwholesome qualities.

“Suppose an excellent thoroughbred horse would not wish: ‘Oh, if only people would assign me a thoroughbred’s place, feed me a thoroughbred’s food, and give me a thoroughbred’s grooming!’ yet people assign him a thoroughbred’s place, feed him a thoroughbred’s food, \[169\] and give him a thoroughbred’s grooming. For what reason? Because wise people see that he has abandoned his tricks, ploys, gambits, and wiles. So too, although such a bhikkhu might not wish: ‘Oh, if only my fellow bhikkhus would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!’ yet his fellow bhikkhus honor, respect, esteem, and venerate him. For what reason? Because his wise fellow bhikkhus see that he has abandoned those bad unwholesome qualities.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.87-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA94]] | A v 164 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA94]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN3]], [[MN15]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.87]]
> ◄  [[an10.86-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.88-bodhi]] ►
