---
sutta_code: "SN37.30"
sutta_title:
  - "Nāsentisutta "
  - "They Expel"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN37]]  / 🌐 [[SN37.30]]
> ◄  [[sn37.29-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn37.31-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 37. Mātugāmasaṁyutta: On Females

### III. Powers — SN37.30: They Send Her Away
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are these five powers of a female. What five?

Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior.

If a female has the power of attractiveness but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her.

If a female has the powers of attractiveness and wealth but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her.

If a female has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, and relatives, but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her.

If a female has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, and children, but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her.

If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of attractiveness, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away.

If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of wealth, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away.

If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of relatives, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away.

If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of children, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away.

These are the five powers of a female.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, mātugāmassa balāni. Katamāni pañca?

Rūpabalaṁ, bhogabalaṁ, ñātibalaṁ, puttabalaṁ, sīlabalaṁ.

Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca sīlabalena, nāsenteva naṁ, kule na vāsenti.

Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, na ca sīlabalena, nāsenteva naṁ, kule na vāsenti.

Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca, na ca sīlabalena, nāsenteva naṁ, kule na vāsenti.

Rūpabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, bhogabalena ca, ñātibalena ca, puttabalena ca, na ca sīlabalena, nāsenteva naṁ, kule na vāsenti.

Sīlabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca rūpabalena, vāsenteva naṁ, kule na nāsenti.

Sīlabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca bhogabalena, vāsenteva naṁ, kule na nāsenti.

Sīlabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca ñātibalena, vāsenteva naṁ, kule na nāsenti.

Sīlabalena ca, bhikkhave, mātugāmo samannāgato hoti, na ca puttabalena, vāsenteva naṁ, kule na nāsenti.

Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañca mātugāmassa balānī"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn37.30-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 247 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN37]]  / 🌐 [[SN37.30]]
> ◄  [[sn37.29-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn37.31-pali-sc]] ►
