---
sutta_code: "SN13.5"
sutta_title:
  - "Pathavīsutta "
  - "The Earth"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.5]]
> ◄  [[sn13.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn13.6-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 13. Abhisamayasaṁyutta: On the Breakthrough

### I. Comprehension — SN13.5: The Earth
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose a person was to place seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds on the great earth.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds, or the great earth?”

2“Sir, the great earth is certainly more. The seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds are tiny. Compared to the great earth, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.”

“In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that’s over and done with is more …”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso mahāpathaviyā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā upanikkhipeyya.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ, yā vā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā upanikkhittā yā vā mahāpathavī"ti?

2"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ, yadidaṁ mahāpathavī; appamattikā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā upanikkhittā. Neva satimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na sahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na satasahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti mahāpathaviṁ upanidhāya satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā upanikkhittā"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … dhammacakkhupaṭilābho"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn13.5-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA439]], [[SA441]] | S ii 136 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA441]], [[SN56.55]], [[SN13.9]], [[SN56.59]], [[SN56.49]], [[SA439]], [[SN13.11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.5]]
> ◄  [[sn13.4-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn13.6-sujato-pali]] ►
