---
sutta_code: "SN13.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyasamuddasutta "
  - "The Ocean (2nd)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.8]]
> ◄  [[sn13.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn13.9-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 13. Abhisamayasaṁyutta: On the Breakthrough

### I. Comprehension — SN13.8: The Ocean (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose the water in the ocean dried up and evaporated except for two or three drops.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the water in the ocean that has dried up and evaporated, or the two or three drops left?”

2“Sir, the water in the ocean that has dried up and evaporated is certainly more. The two or three drops left are tiny. Compared to the water in the ocean that has dried up and evaporated, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.”

“In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that’s over and done with is more …”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāsamuddo parikkhayaṁ pariyādānaṁ gaccheyya, ṭhapetvā dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ, yaṁ vā mahāsamudde udakaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādiṇṇaṁ yāni vā dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhānī"ti?

2"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ mahāsamudde udakaṁ, yadidaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādiṇṇaṁ; appamattakāni dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhāni. Neva satimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na sahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na satasahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti mahāsamudde udakaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādiṇṇaṁ upanidhāya dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni avasiṭṭhānī"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … dhammacakkhupaṭilābho"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn13.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA891]] | S ii 137 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA891]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.8]]
> ◄  [[sn13.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn13.9-sujato-pali]] ►
