---
sutta_code: "SN13.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Pabbatasutta "
  - "A Mountain"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.9]]
> ◄  [[sn13.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn13.10-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 13. Abhisamayasaṁyutta: On the Breakthrough

### I. Comprehension — SN13.9: A Mountain (1)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose a person was to place seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds on the Himalayas, the king of mountains.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds, or the Himalayas, the king of mountains?”

2“Sir, the Himalayas, the king of mountains, is certainly more. The seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds are tiny. Compared to the Himalayas, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.”


“In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that’s over and done with is more …”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso himavato pabbatarājassa satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhipeyya.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ, yā vā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā yo vā himavā pabbatarājā"ti?

2"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ yadidaṁ himavā pabbatarājā; appamattikā satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā. Neva satimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na sahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na satasahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti himavantaṁ pabbatarājānaṁ upanidhāya satta sāsapamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā"ti.


"Evameva kho … pe … dhammacakkhupaṭilābho"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn13.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA439]], [[SA441]] | S ii 137 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA441]], [[SN13.5]], [[SN56.55]], [[SN56.59]], [[SN56.49]], [[SA439]], [[SN13.11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.9]]
> ◄  [[sn13.8-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn13.10-sujato-pali]] ►
