---
sutta_code: "SN13.6"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyapathavīsutta "
  - "The Earth (2nd)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.6]]
> ◄  [[sn13.5-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn13.7-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 13. Abhisamayasaṁyutta: On the Breakthrough

### I. Comprehension — SN13.6: The Earth (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato.  

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose the great earth was worn away and eroded except for seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the great earth that has been worn away and eroded, or the seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds that are left?”

2“Sir, the great earth that has been worn away and eroded is certainly more. The seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds are tiny. Compared to the great earth that has been worn away and eroded, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.”

“In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that’s over and done with is more …”

#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāpathavī parikkhayaṁ pariyādānaṁ gaccheyya, ṭhapetvā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ, yaṁ vā mahāpathaviyā parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādiṇṇaṁ yā vā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā"ti?

2"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ, mahāpathaviyā, yadidaṁ parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādiṇṇaṁ; appamattikā satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā. Neva satimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na sahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na satasahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti mahāpathaviyā parikkhīṇaṁ pariyādiṇṇaṁ upanidhāya satta kolaṭṭhimattiyo guḷikā avasiṭṭhā"ti.

"Evameva kho, bhikkhave … pe … dhammacakkhupaṭilābho"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn13.6-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA891]] | S ii 136 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA891]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.6]]
> ◄  [[sn13.5-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn13.7-sujato-pali]] ►
