---
sutta_code: "SN13.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Tatiyapabbatasutta "
  - "A Mountain (3rd)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.11]]
> ◄  [[sn13.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 13. Abhisamayasaṁyutta: On the Breakthrough

### I. Comprehension — SN13.11: A Mountain (3rd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, suppose a person was to place down on Sineru, the king of mountains, seven pebbles the size of mung beans.

What do you think, bhikkhus? Which is more: the seven pebbles the size of mung beans, or Sineru, the king of mountains?”

2“Sir, Sineru, the king of mountains, is certainly more. The seven pebbles the size of mung beans are tiny. Compared to Sineru, it’s not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part.”

2“In the same way, compared with the achievements of a noble disciple accomplished in view, the achievements of the ascetics, brahmins, and wanderers who follow other paths is not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part. So great is the achievement of the person accomplished in view, so great is their direct knowledge.”


#### Pali

1Sāvatthiyaṁ vihārati.

"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso sinerussa pabbatarājassa satta muggamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhipeyya.

Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, katamaṁ nu kho bahutaraṁ, yā vā satta muggamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā yo vā sineru pabbatarājā"ti?

2"Etadeva, bhante, bahutaraṁ yadidaṁ sineru pabbatarājā; appamattikā satta muggamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā. Neva satimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na sahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti na satasahassimaṁ kalaṁ upenti sineruṁ pabbatarājānaṁ upanidhāya satta muggamattiyo pāsāṇasakkharā upanikkhittā"ti.

3"Evameva kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvakassa diṭṭhisampannassa puggalassa adhigamaṁ upanidhāya aññatitthiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇaparibbājakānaṁ adhigamo neva satimaṁ kalaṁ upeti na sahassimaṁ kalaṁ upeti na satasahassimaṁ kalaṁ upeti. Evaṁ mahādhigamo, bhikkhave, diṭṭhisampanno puggalo, evaṁ mahābhiñño"ti.


Ekādasamaṁ.

Abhisamayasaṁyuttaṁ samattaṁ.

4Nakhasikhā pokkharaṇī,  
sambhejjaudake ca dve;  
Dve pathavī dve samuddā,  
tayo ca pabbatūpamāti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn13.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA439]], [[SA441]] | S ii 139 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA441]], [[SN13.5]], [[SN56.55]], [[SN13.9]], [[SN56.59]], [[SN56.49]], [[SA439]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN13]]  / 🌐 [[SN13.11]]
> ◄  [[sn13.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[]] ►
