---
sutta_code: "DN18"
sutta_title:
  - "Janavasabha Sutta "
  - "With Janavasabha"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[DN]]  / 🌐 [[DN18]]
> ◄  [[dn17-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[dn19-deepseek-pali]] ►

# Janavasabhasuttaṃ

## The Janavasabha Sutta

## Nātikiyādibyākaraṇaṃ

### The Exposition of Predictions Concerning the Nāṭikiyas, etc.

273. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā nātike [nādike (sī. syā. pī.)] viharati giñjakāvasathe. Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā parito parito janapadesu paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti kāsikosalesu vajjimallesu cetivaṃsesu [cetiyavaṃsesu (ka.)] kurupañcālesu majjhasūrasenesu [macchasurasenesu (syā.), macchasūrasenesu (sī. pī.)] – ‘‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno [upapannoti (ka.)]. Paropaññāsa nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyino anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā. Sādhikā navuti nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmino, sakideva [sakiṃdeva (ka.)] imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissanti. Sātirekāni pañcasatāni nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā’’ti.

273.Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Nātika in the Brick Hall. At that time, the Blessed One was declaring the destinies of deceased lay followers in various regions all around—in Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla, Ceti, Vaṃsa, Kuru, Pañcāla, and Maccha-Sūrasena—saying, “So-and-so has been reborn there, so-and-so has been reborn there.” Over fifty lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, been reborn spontaneously, and will attain final Nibbāna there, not liable to return from that world. More than ninety lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hatred, and delusion, become once-returners, who will come back to this world only once more and make an end of suffering. Over five hundred lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the three fetters, become stream-enterers, not liable to fall into the states of woe, assured, destined for enlightenment.

274. Assosuṃ kho nātikiyā paricārakā – ‘‘bhagavā kira parito parito janapadesu paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti kāsikosalesu vajjimallesu cetivaṃsesu kurupañcālesu majjhasūrasenesu – ‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno. Paropaññāsa nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyino anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā. Sādhikā navuti nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmino sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissanti. Sātirekāni pañcasatāni nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā’ti. Tena ca nātikiyā paricārakā attamanā ahesuṃ pamuditā pītisomanassajātā bhagavato pañhaveyyākaraṇaṃ [pañhāveyyākaraṇaṃ (syā. ka.)] sutvā.

274.The lay followers of Nātika heard: “The Blessed One, in various regions all around, is declaring the destinies of deceased lay followers—in Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla, Ceti, Vaṃsa, Kuru, Pañcāla, and Maccha-Sūrasena—saying, ‘So-and-so has been reborn there, so-and-so has been reborn there.’ Over fifty lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, been reborn spontaneously, and will attain final Nibbāna there, not liable to return from that world. More than ninety lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hatred, and delusion, become once-returners, who will come back to this world only once more and make an end of suffering. Over five hundred lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the three fetters, become stream-enterers, not liable to fall into the states of woe, assured, destined for enlightenment.” Hearing the Blessed One’s explanation, the lay followers of Nātika were pleased, delighted, and filled with joy and gladness.

275. Assosi kho āyasmā ānando – ‘‘bhagavā kira parito parito janapadesu paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti kāsikosalesu vajjimallesu cetivaṃsesu kurupañcālesu majjhasūrasenesu – ‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno. Paropaññāsa nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyino anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā. Sādhikā navuti nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmino sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissanti. Sātirekāni pañcasatāni nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā’ti. Tena ca nātikiyā paricārakā attamanā ahesuṃ pamuditā pītisomanassajātā bhagavato pañhaveyyākaraṇaṃ sutvā’’ti.

275.Venerable Ānanda heard: “The Blessed One, in various regions all around, has been declaring the destinies of deceased lay followers—in Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla, Ceti, Vaṃsa, Kuru, Pañcāla, and Maccha-Sūrasena—saying, ‘So-and-so has been reborn there, so-and-so has been reborn there.’ Over fifty lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, been reborn spontaneously, and will attain final Nibbāna there, not liable to return from that world. More than ninety lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hatred, and delusion, become once-returners, who will come back to this world only once more and make an end of suffering. Over five hundred lay followers from Nātika who have passed away have, with the destruction of the three fetters, become stream-enterers, not liable to fall into the states of woe, assured, destined for enlightenment.’ ” And those lay followers of Nātika were glad, delighted, and filled with joy and gladness, hearing the Blessed One’s explanation.”

## Ānandaparikathā

### Ānanda's Talk.

276. Atha kho āyasmato ānandassa etadahosi – ‘‘ime kho panāpi ahesuṃ māgadhakā paricārakā bahū ceva rattaññū ca abbhatītā kālaṅkatā. Suññā maññe aṅgamagadhā aṅgamāgadhakehi [aṅgamāgadhikehi (syā.)] paricārakehi abbhatītehi kālaṅkatehi. Te kho panāpi [tena kho panāpi (syā.)] ahesuṃ buddhe pasannā dhamme pasannā saṅghe pasannā sīlesu paripūrakārino. Te abbhatītā kālaṅkatā bhagavatā abyākatā; tesampissa sādhu veyyākaraṇaṃ, bahujano pasīdeyya, tato gaccheyya sugatiṃ. Ayaṃ kho panāpi ahosi rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro dhammiko dhammarājā hito brāhmaṇagahapatikānaṃ negamānañceva jānapadānañca. Apissudaṃ manussā kittayamānarūpā viharanti – ‘evaṃ no so dhammiko dhammarājā sukhāpetvā kālaṅkato, evaṃ mayaṃ tassa dhammikassa dhammarañño vijite phāsu [phāsukaṃ (syā.)] viharimhā’ti. So kho panāpi ahosi buddhe pasanno dhamme pasanno saṅghe pasanno sīlesu paripūrakārī. Apissudaṃ manussā evamāhaṃsu – ‘yāva maraṇakālāpi rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro bhagavantaṃ kittayamānarūpo kālaṅkato’ti. So abbhatīto kālaṅkato bhagavatā abyākato. Tassapissa sādhu veyyākaraṇaṃ bahujano pasīdeyya, tato gaccheyya sugatiṃ. Bhagavato kho pana sambodhi magadhesu. Yattha kho pana bhagavato sambodhi magadhesu, kathaṃ tatra bhagavā māgadhake paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu na byākareyya. Bhagavā ce kho pana māgadhake paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu na byākareyya, dīnamanā [ninnamanā (syā.), dīnamānā (sī. pī.)] tenassu māgadhakā paricārakā; yena kho panassu dīnamanā māgadhakā paricārakā kathaṃ te bhagavā na byākareyyā’’ti?

276.Then Venerable Ānanda thought: “These Magadhan attendants were many and of long standing, and they have passed away. Surely, Aṅga and Magadha seem empty now that the Aṅga-Magadhan attendants have passed away. Yet they too were devoted to the Buddha, devoted to the Dhamma, devoted to the Saṅgha, and were consummate in virtuous conduct. They have passed away, but the Blessed One has not declared their destination. It would be good if the Blessed One were to declare their destination—many people would be heartened and go to a good rebirth. And this King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha was a righteous king, a king of Dhamma, beneficial to brahmins and householders, and to the townsfolk and country folk. Even now, people praise him, saying: ‘Thus did that righteous king of Dhamma pass away after bringing happiness; thus did we dwell at ease in the realm of that righteous king of Dhamma.’ He too was devoted to the Buddha, devoted to the Dhamma, devoted to the Saṅgha, and was consummate in virtuous conduct. People even say: ‘King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha praised the Blessed One up until the moment of his death.’ He has passed away, but the Blessed One has not declared his destination. It would be good if the Blessed One were to declare his destination—many people would be heartened and go to a good rebirth. Moreover, the Blessed One’s awakening was in Magadha. Since the Blessed One’s awakening was in Magadha, how could the Blessed One not declare the rebirths of the Magadhan attendants who have passed away? If the Blessed One does not declare the rebirths of the Magadhan attendants who have passed away, the Magadhan attendants would be disheartened. And if the Magadhan attendants are disheartened, how could the Blessed One not declare their destination?”

277. Idamāyasmā ānando māgadhake paricārake ārabbha eko raho anuvicintetvā rattiyā paccūsasamayaṃ paccuṭṭhāya yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘sutaṃ metaṃ, bhante – ‘bhagavā kira parito parito janapadesu paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti kāsikosalesu vajjimallesu cetivaṃsesu kurupañcālesu majjhasūrasenesu – ‘‘asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapanno. Paropaññāsa nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā pañcannaṃ orambhāgiyānaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā opapātikā tattha parinibbāyino anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā. Sādhikā navuti nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṃ tanuttā sakadāgāmino, sakideva imaṃ lokaṃ āgantvā dukkhassantaṃ karissanti. Sātirekāni pañcasatāni nātikiyā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇāti. Tena ca nātikiyā paricārakā attamanā ahesuṃ pamuditā pītisomanassajātā bhagavato pañhaveyyākaraṇaṃ sutvā’’ti. Ime kho panāpi, bhante, ahesuṃ māgadhakā paricārakā bahū ceva rattaññū ca abbhatītā kālaṅkatā. Suññā maññe aṅgamagadhā aṅgamāgadhakehi paricārakehi abbhatītehi kālaṅkatehi. Te kho panāpi, bhante, ahesuṃ buddhe pasannā dhamme pasannā saṅghe pasannā sīlesu paripūrakārino, te abbhatītā kālaṅkatā bhagavatā abyākatā. Tesampissa sādhu veyyākaraṇaṃ, bahujano pasīdeyya, tato gaccheyya sugatiṃ. Ayaṃ kho panāpi, bhante, ahosi rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro dhammiko dhammarājā hito brāhmaṇagahapatikānaṃ negamānañceva jānapadānañca. Apissudaṃ manussā kittayamānarūpā viharanti – ‘evaṃ no so dhammiko dhammarājā sukhāpetvā kālaṅkato. Evaṃ mayaṃ tassa dhammikassa dhammarañño vijite phāsu viharimhā’ti. So kho panāpi, bhante, ahosi buddhe pasanno dhamme pasanno saṅghe pasanno sīlesu paripūrakārī. Apissudaṃ manussā evamāhaṃsu – ‘yāva maraṇakālāpi rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro bhagavantaṃ kittayamānarūpo kālaṅkato’ti. So abbhatīto kālaṅkato bhagavatā abyākato; tassapissa sādhu veyyākaraṇaṃ, bahujano pasīdeyya, tato gaccheyya sugatiṃ. Bhagavato kho pana, bhante, sambodhi magadhesu. Yattha kho pana, bhante, bhagavato sambodhi magadhesu, kathaṃ tatra bhagavā māgadhake paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu na byākareyya? Bhagavā ce kho pana, bhante, māgadhake paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu na byākareyya dīnamanā tenassu māgadhakā paricārakā; yena kho panassu dīnamanā māgadhakā paricārakā kathaṃ te bhagavā na byākareyyā’’ti. Idamāyasmā ānando māgadhake paricārake ārabbha bhagavato sammukhā parikathaṃ katvā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi.

277.Venerable Ānanda, reflecting alone in private about the Magadhan attendants, rose at dawn and approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Seated to one side, Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, I have heard that the Blessed One declares the rebirths of attendants who have passed away in different regions—such as Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla, Ceti, Vaṃsa, Kuru, Pañcāla, and Majjhasūrasena—stating, ‘This one was reborn here, that one was reborn there.’ “More than fifty of the Nātika attendants who have passed away, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, were reborn spontaneously and will attain final Nibbāna there, never to return from that world. “More than ninety of the Nātika attendants who have passed away, with the destruction of three fetters and the weakening of lust, hatred, and delusion, are once-returners, who will come back to this world only once and make an end of suffering. “Over five hundred of the Nātika attendants who have passed away, with the destruction of three fetters, are stream-enterers, no longer liable to fall into the lower realms, assured of enlightenment. “And those Nātika attendants were delighted, joyful, and filled with gladness upon hearing the Blessed One’s explanation. “But, venerable sir, there were also these Magadhan attendants, many of whom were of long standing and have passed away. I think Aṅga and Magadha are now empty of those departed Magadhan attendants. “Those attendants, venerable sir, were devoted to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and were consummate in virtuous conduct. Yet, they have passed away and have not been declared by the Blessed One. It would be good if there were also an explanation about them, many people would be heartened and go to a good rebirth. “Moreover, venerable sir, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha was a righteous king, a just ruler who cared for brahmins and householders, both in towns and the countryside. People still praise and commemorate him, saying, ‘That righteous and just king made us happy before passing away. We lived comfortably in the realm of that righteous king.’ “He too, venerable sir, was devoted to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and was consummate in virtuous conduct. People even said, ‘King Seniya Bimbisāra passed away, praising the Blessed One even at the time of death.’ Yet, he has passed away and has not been declared by the Blessed One; it would be good if there were also an explanation about him; many people would be heartened and go to a good rebirth. “Venerable sir, the Blessed One's awakening was in Magadha. Since the Blessed One’s awakening was in Magadha, how could the Blessed One not declare the rebirths of the departed Magadhan attendants there? If the Blessed One does not declare the rebirths of the Magadhan attendants, the Magadhan attendants might become disheartened. And if the Magadhan attendants are disheartened, how could the Blessed One not declare them?” Having spoken these words about the Magadhan attendants in the presence of the Blessed One, Venerable Ānanda rose from his seat, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him, and departed.

278. Atha kho bhagavā acirapakkante āyasmante ānande pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya nātikaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. Nātike piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto pāde pakkhāletvā giñjakāvasathaṃ pavisitvā māgadhake paricārake ārabbha aṭṭhiṃ katvā [aṭṭhikatvā (sī. syā. pī.)] manasikatvā sabbaṃ cetasā [sabbacetasā (pī.)] samannāharitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi – ‘‘gatiṃ nesaṃ jānissāmi abhisamparāyaṃ, yaṃgatikā te bhavanto yaṃabhisamparāyā’’ti. Addasā kho bhagavā māgadhake paricārake ‘‘yaṃgatikā te bhavanto yaṃabhisamparāyā’’ti. Atha kho bhagavā sāyanhasamayaṃ paṭisallānā vuṭṭhito giñjakāvasathā nikkhamitvā vihārapacchāyāyaṃ paññatte āsane nisīdi.

278.Then, soon after Venerable Ānanda had left, the Blessed One, in the morning, dressed, took his bowl and robe, and entered Nātika for alms. Having walked for alms in Nātika, after the meal, on returning from the alms round, he washed his feet, entered the brick house, focused his attention on the attendants from Magadha, considered them, and directed all his awareness towards them. He sat down on the prepared seat, thinking: “I will know their destiny, their future lives—what their destiny is, what their future life will be.” The Blessed One saw the attendants from Magadha—what their destiny was, what their future life would be. Then, in the evening, the Blessed One rose from seclusion, left the brick house, and sat down on the prepared seat in the shade of the monastery.

279. Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘upasantapadisso [upasantapatiso (ka.)] bhante bhagavā bhātiriva bhagavato mukhavaṇṇo vippasannattā indriyānaṃ. Santena nūnajja bhante bhagavā vihārena vihāsī’’ti? ‘‘Yadeva kho me tvaṃ, ānanda, māgadhake paricārake ārabbha sammukhā parikathaṃ katvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkanto, tadevāhaṃ nātike piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto pāde pakkhāletvā giñjakāvasathaṃ pavisitvā māgadhake paricārake ārabbha aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasikatvā sabbaṃ cetasā samannāharitvā paññatte āsane nisīdiṃ – ‘gatiṃ nesaṃ jānissāmi abhisamparāyaṃ, yaṃgatikā te bhavanto yaṃabhisamparāyā’ti. Addasaṃ kho ahaṃ, ānanda, māgadhake paricārake ‘yaṃgatikā te bhavanto yaṃabhisamparāyā’’’ti.

279.Then Venerable Ānanda approached the Blessed One; having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Seated to one side, Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, the Blessed One's appearance is serene, and the color of the Blessed One's face shines brightly due to the clarity of his faculties. Surely today, Lord, the Blessed One has been abiding in a peaceful abiding?” “Just now, Ānanda, after you had spoken to me face to face about the Magadhan attendants and then risen from your seat and departed, I went for alms in Nātika. After the meal, on returning from the alms round, I washed my feet, entered the brick house, and focusing on the Magadhan attendants, giving attention, bringing everything to mind, I sat down on the prepared seat, thinking: ‘I will know their destiny, their future lives—what their destiny is, what their future life will be.’ And indeed, Ānanda, I saw the Magadhan attendants—what their destiny is, what their future life will be.”

## Janavasabhayakkho

### Janavasabha the Yakkha

280. ‘‘Atha kho, ānanda, antarahito yakkho saddamanussāvesi – ‘janavasabho ahaṃ bhagavā; janavasabho ahaṃ sugatā’ti. Abhijānāsi no tvaṃ, ānanda, ito pubbe evarūpaṃ nāmadheyyaṃ sutaṃ [sutvā (pī.)] yadidaṃ janavasabho’’ti?

280.“Then, Ānanda, an invisible yakkha made a sound, announcing: ‘I am Janavasabha, Blessed One; I am Janavasabha, Well-Gone One.’ Do you remember, Ānanda, ever hearing before this such a name as Janavasabha?”

‘‘Na kho ahaṃ, bhante, abhijānāmi ito pubbe evarūpaṃ nāmadheyyaṃ sutaṃ yadidaṃ janavasabhoti, api ca me, bhante, lomāni haṭṭhāni ‘janavasabho’ti nāmadheyyaṃ sutvā. Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, etadahosi – ‘na hi nūna so orako yakkho bhavissati yadidaṃ evarūpaṃ nāmadheyyaṃ supaññattaṃ yadidaṃ janavasabho’’ti. ‘‘Anantarā kho, ānanda, saddapātubhāvā uḷāravaṇṇo me yakkho sammukhe pāturahosi. Dutiyampi saddamanussāvesi – ‘bimbisāro ahaṃ bhagavā; bimbisāro ahaṃ sugatāti. Idaṃ sattamaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, vessavaṇassa mahārājassa sahabyataṃ upapajjāmi, so tato cuto manussarājā bhavituṃ pahomi [so tato cuto manussarājā, amanussarājā divi homi (sī. pī.)].

“Indeed, venerable sir, I do not recall ever before hearing such a name as ‘Janavasabha.’ Yet, venerable sir, upon hearing the name ‘Janavasabha,’ the hairs on my body stood on end. Then, venerable sir, it occurred to me: ‘Surely, this cannot be an insignificant yakkha, for such a well-formulated name as “Janavasabha” has been given to him!’” “Immediately after the sound appeared, Ānanda, a yakkha of splendid complexion manifested before me. A second time, he proclaimed: ‘I am Bimbisāra, Blessed One; I am Bimbisāra, Well-Gone One.’ This is the seventh time, venerable sir, that I have been reborn into companionship with the great king Vessavaṇa. Having passed away from there, I am capable of becoming a human king.”

Ito satta tato satta, saṃsārāni catuddasa;Nivāsamabhijānāmi, yattha me vusitaṃ pure.

“Seven lives from here, seven from there, fourteen rounds of existence; I recollect my former abodes, where I lived before.”

281. ‘Dīgharattaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, avinipāto avinipātaṃ sañjānāmi, āsā ca pana me santiṭṭhati sakadāgāmitāyā’ti. ‘Acchariyamidaṃ āyasmato janavasabhassa yakkhassa, abbhutamidaṃ āyasmato janavasabhassa yakkhassa. ‘‘Dīgharattaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhante, avinipāto avinipātaṃ sañjānāmī’’ti ca vadesi, ‘‘āsā ca pana me santiṭṭhati sakadāgāmitāyā’’ti ca vadesi, kutonidānaṃ panāyasmā janavasabho yakkho evarūpaṃ uḷāraṃ visesādhigamaṃ sañjānātīti? Na aññatra, bhagavā, tava sāsanā, na aññatra [aññattha (sī. pī.)], sugata, tava sāsanā; yadagge ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavati ekantikato [ekantato (syā.), ekantagato (pī.)] abhippasanno, tadagge ahaṃ, bhante, dīgharattaṃ avinipāto avinipātaṃ sañjānāmi, āsā ca pana me santiṭṭhati sakadāgāmitāya. Idhāhaṃ, bhante, vessavaṇena mahārājena pesito virūḷhakassa mahārājassa santike kenacideva karaṇīyena addasaṃ bhagavantaṃ antarāmagge giñjakāvasathaṃ pavisitvā māgadhake paricārake ārabbha aṭṭhiṃ katvā manasikatvā sabbaṃ cetasā samannāharitvā nisinnaṃ – ‘‘gatiṃ nesaṃ jānissāmi abhisamparāyaṃ, yaṃgatikā te bhavanto yaṃabhisamparāyā’’ti. Anacchariyaṃ kho panetaṃ, bhante, yaṃ vessavaṇassa mahārājassa tassaṃ parisāyaṃ bhāsato sammukhā sutaṃ sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ – ‘‘yaṃgatikā te bhavanto yaṃabhisamparāyā’’ti. Tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, etadahosi – bhagavantañca dakkhāmi, idañca bhagavato ārocessāmīti. Ime kho me, bhante, dvepaccayā bhagavantaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkamituṃ’.

281.“For a long time, venerable sir, I have perceived myself as not being subject to downfall, and my hope for being a once-returner is established.” “It is wonderful, Venerable Janavasabha the yakkha, it is amazing, Venerable Janavasabha the yakkha, that you say, ‘For a long time, venerable sir, I have perceived myself as not being subject to downfall,’ and also say, ‘My hope for being a once-returner is established.’ But what is the cause, Venerable Janavasabha the yakkha, what is the source, that you perceive such an eminent, superior attainment?” “There is no other cause, Blessed One, no other cause, Well-Gone One, than your teaching. Since, venerable sir, I have had unwavering confidence in the Blessed One, from that time on, venerable sir, I have perceived myself as not being subject to downfall for a long time, and my hope for being a once-returner is established. Here, venerable sir, I was sent by King Vessavaṇa on some business to King Virūḷhaka. On the way, I saw the Blessed One entering the brick dwelling and sitting down, focusing his entire mind on the Magadhan servants, making them an object, attending to them, thinking: ‘I will know their destination in the next life, what destination, what future state these worthy ones are bound for.’ It is indeed amazing, venerable sir, that what was spoken by King Vessavaṇa in that assembly, heard face to face, received face to face, was: ‘What destination, what future state these worthy ones are bound for.’ Then, venerable sir, it occurred to me: ‘I will see the Blessed One and report this to him.’ These, venerable sir, are the two reasons for me to approach the Blessed One.”

## Devasabhā

### Deva Assembly

282. ‘Purimāni, bhante, divasāni purimatarāni tadahuposathe pannarase vassūpanāyikāya puṇṇāya puṇṇamāya rattiyā kevalakappā ca devā tāvatiṃsā sudhammāyaṃ sabhāyaṃ sannisinnā honti sannipatitā. Mahatī ca dibbaparisā [dibbā parisā (sī. pī.)] samantato nisinnā honti [nisinnā hoti (sī.), sannisinnā honti sannipatitā (ka.)], cattāro ca mahārājāno catuddisā nisinnā honti. Puratthimāya disāya dhataraṭṭho mahārājā pacchimābhimukho [pacchābhimukho (ka.)] nisinno hoti deve purakkhatvā; dakkhiṇāya disāya virūḷhako mahārājā uttarābhimukho nisinno hoti deve purakkhatvā; pacchimāya disāya virūpakkho mahārājā puratthābhimukho nisinno hoti deve purakkhatvā; uttarāya disāya vessavaṇo mahārājā dakkhiṇābhimukho nisinno hoti deve purakkhatvā. Yadā, bhante, kevalakappā ca devā tāvatiṃsā sudhammāyaṃ sabhāyaṃ sannisinnā honti sannipatitā, mahatī ca dibbaparisā samantato nisinnā honti, cattāro ca mahārājāno catuddisā nisinnā honti. Idaṃ nesaṃ hoti āsanasmiṃ; atha pacchā amhākaṃ āsanaṃ hoti. Ye te, bhante, devā bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ caritvā adhunūpapannā tāvatiṃsakāyaṃ, te aññe deve atirocanti vaṇṇena ceva yasasā ca. Tena sudaṃ, bhante, devā tāvatiṃsā attamanā honti pamuditā pītisomanassajātā ‘‘dibbā vata bho kāyā paripūrenti, hāyanti asurakāyā’’ti. Atha kho, bhante, sakko devānamindo devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ sampasādaṃ viditvā imāhi gāthāhi anumodi –

282.“Venerable sir, in the past, on earlier occasions, on the fifteenth day, the Uposatha day, the full moon night of the commencement of the rains retreat, all the gods of the Tāvatiṃsa heaven were seated together in the Sudhammā assembly hall. A great divine assembly was seated all around, and the four great kings were seated in the four directions. In the eastern direction, King Dhataraṭṭha, the great king, was seated facing west, having the gods in front of him. In the southern direction, King Virūḷhaka, the great king, was seated facing north, having the gods in front of him. In the western direction, King Virūpakkha, the great king, was seated facing east, having the gods in front of him. In the northern direction, King Vessavaṇa, the great king, was seated facing south, having the gods in front of him. When, venerable sir, all the gods of the Tāvatiṃsa heaven were seated together in the Sudhammā assembly hall, and the great divine assembly was seated all around, and the four great kings were seated in the four directions, this was their seating arrangement; afterwards, our seats were arranged. Those gods, venerable sir, who had lived the holy life under the Blessed One and had recently arisen in the Tāvatiṃsa heaven, outshone the other gods in beauty and glory. Then, venerable sir, the gods of the Tāvatiṃsa heaven were glad, joyful, filled with rapture and happiness, saying, ‘Truly, the divine hosts are increasing, while the hosts of the asuras decline!’ Then, venerable sir, Sakka, the lord of the gods, knowing the satisfaction of the Tāvatiṃsa gods, rejoiced with these verses—

‘‘Modanti vata bho devā, tāvatiṃsā sahindakā [saindakā (sī.)];Tathāgataṃ namassantā, dhammassa ca sudhammataṃ.

“Indeed, the gods delight, the Tāvatiṃsa gods with Indra, honoring the Tathāgata and the well-proclaimed Dhamma.”

Nave deve ca passantā, vaṇṇavante yasassine [yasassino (syā.)];Sugatasmiṃ brahmacariyaṃ, caritvāna idhāgate.

“Seeing the new gods, glorious and famous, having lived the holy life under the Well-Gone One, they have come here.”

Te aññe atirocanti, vaṇṇena yasasāyunā;Sāvakā bhūripaññassa, visesūpagatā idha.

“They outshine others in beauty, fame, and lifespan; disciples of the one with vast wisdom attain distinction here.”

Idaṃ disvāna nandanti, tāvatiṃsā sahindakā;Tathāgataṃ namassantā, dhammassa ca sudhammata’’nti.

“Seeing this, the Thirty Gods with Indra rejoice, paying homage to the Tathāgata and the well-proclaimed Dhamma.”

‘Tena sudaṃ, bhante, devā tāvatiṃsā bhiyyosomattāya attamanā honti pamuditā pītisomanassajātā ‘‘dibbā vata, bho, kāyā paripūrenti, hāyanti asurakāyā’’ti. Atha kho, bhante, yenatthena devā tāvatiṃsā sudhammāyaṃ sabhāyaṃ sannisinnā honti sannipatitā, taṃ atthaṃ cintayitvā taṃ atthaṃ mantayitvā vuttavacanāpi taṃ [vuttavacanā nāmidaṃ (ka.)] cattāro mahārājāno tasmiṃ atthe honti. Paccānusiṭṭhavacanāpi taṃ [paccānusiṭṭhavacanā nāmidaṃ (ka.)] cattāro mahārājāno tasmiṃ atthe honti, sakesu sakesu āsanesu ṭhitā avipakkantā [adhipakkantā (ka.)].

“Then indeed, venerable sir, the Tāvatiṃsa gods were exceedingly joyful and elated, filled with rapture and happiness, thinking: ‘Truly, friends, the divine hosts are increasing, while the hosts of asuras are declining!’ Then, venerable sir, whatever matter the Tāvatiṃsa gods had gathered and assembled in the Sudhammā hall to consider and discuss, concerning that matter the Four Great Kings, having been told and consulted, were present, standing by their respective seats, not having departed.”

Te vuttavākyā rājāno, paṭiggayhānusāsaniṃ;Vippasannamanā santā, aṭṭhaṃsu samhi āsaneti.

“The kings, having received the advice, with serene and pleased minds, stood in their places.”

283. ‘Atha kho, bhante, uttarāya disāya uḷāro āloko sañjāyi, obhāso pāturahosi atikkammeva devānaṃ devānubhāvaṃ. Atha kho, bhante, sakko devānamindo deve tāvatiṃse āmantesi – ‘‘yathā kho, mārisā, nimittāni dissanti, uḷāro āloko sañjāyati, obhāso pātubhavati, brahmā pātubhavissati. Brahmuno hetaṃ pubbanimittaṃ pātubhāvāya yadidaṃ āloko sañjāyati obhāso pātubhavatīti.

283.“Then, venerable sir, in the northern direction a great light arose, a radiance appeared, surpassing even the divine power of the gods. Then, venerable sir, Sakka, the lord of the gods, addressed the Tāvatiṃsa gods: ‘Good sirs, as these signs appear—a great light arises, a radiance manifests—Brahmā will appear. For this is a preliminary sign of Brahmā’s appearance: that a light arises and a radiance manifests.’

‘‘Yathā nimittā dissanti, brahmā pātubhavissati;Brahmuno hetaṃ nimittaṃ, obhāso vipulo mahā’’ti.

“As these signs appear, Brahmā will be revealed; this is Brahmā’s sign—a vast and great radiance.”

## Sanaṅkumārakathā

### The Story of Sanaṅkumāra

284. ‘Atha kho, bhante, devā tāvatiṃsā yathāsakesu āsanesu nisīdiṃsu – ‘‘obhāsametaṃ ñassāma, yaṃvipāko bhavissati, sacchikatvāva naṃ gamissāmā’’ti. Cattāropi mahārājāno yathāsakesu āsanesu nisīdiṃsu – ‘‘obhāsametaṃ ñassāma yaṃvipāko bhavissati, sacchikatvāva naṃ gamissāmā’’ti. Idaṃ sutvā devā tāvatiṃsā ekaggā samāpajjiṃsu – ‘‘obhāsametaṃ ñassāma, yaṃvipāko bhavissati, sacchikatvāva naṃ gamissāmā’’ti.

284.'Then, venerable sir, the devas of Tāvatiṃsa sat down on their respective seats, thinking: "We will know this radiance and what its result will be; having directly experienced it, we will go to it." The four great kings also sat down on their respective seats, thinking: "We will know this radiance and what its result will be; having directly experienced it, we will go to it." Hearing this, the devas of Tāvatiṃsa became unified in thought: "We will know this radiance and what its result will be; having directly experienced it, we will go to it."'

‘Yadā, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ pātubhavati, oḷārikaṃ attabhāvaṃ abhinimminitvā pātubhavati. Yo kho pana, bhante, brahmuno pakativaṇṇo anabhisambhavanīyo so devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ cakkhupathasmiṃ. Yadā, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ pātubhavati, so aññe deve atirocati vaṇṇena ceva yasasā ca. Seyyathāpi, bhante, sovaṇṇo viggaho mānusaṃ viggahaṃ atirocati; evameva kho, bhante, yadā brahmā sanaṅkumāro devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ pātubhavati, so aññe deve atirocati vaṇṇena ceva yasasā ca. Yadā, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ pātubhavati, na tassaṃ parisāyaṃ koci devo abhivādeti vā paccuṭṭheti vā āsanena vā nimanteti. Sabbeva tuṇhībhūtā pañjalikā pallaṅkena nisīdanti – ‘‘yassadāni devassa pallaṅkaṃ icchissati brahmā sanaṅkumāro, tassa devassa pallaṅke nisīdissatī’’ti.

'When, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra appears to the devas of Tāvatiṃsa, he appears having manifested a gross form. But, venerable sir, Brahmā’s natural appearance is not to be experienced by the eyes of the devas of Tāvatiṃsa. When, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra appears to the devas of Tāvatiṃsa, he outshines the other devas in beauty and glory. Just as, venerable sir, a golden figure outshines a human form, so too, venerable sir, when Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra appears to the devas of Tāvatiṃsa, he outshines the other devas in beauty and glory. When, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra appears to the devas of Tāvatiṃsa, no deva in that assembly greets him, rises for him, or invites him with a seat. Instead, they all sit silently with joined palms, cross-legged, thinking: "On whichever deva’s seat Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra now wishes, on that deva’s seat he will sit."'

‘Yassa kho pana, bhante, devassa brahmā sanaṅkumāro pallaṅke nisīdati, uḷāraṃ so labhati devo vedapaṭilābhaṃ; uḷāraṃ so labhati devo somanassapaṭilābhaṃ. Seyyathāpi, bhante, rājā khattiyo muddhāvasitto adhunābhisitto rajjena, uḷāraṃ so labhati vedapaṭilābhaṃ, uḷāraṃ so labhati somanassapaṭilābhaṃ. Evameva kho, bhante, yassa devassa brahmā sanaṅkumāro pallaṅke nisīdati, uḷāraṃ so labhati devo vedapaṭilābhaṃ, uḷāraṃ so labhati devo somanassapaṭilābhaṃ. Atha, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro oḷārikaṃ attabhāvaṃ abhinimminitvā kumāravaṇṇī [kumāravaṇṇo (syā. ka.)] hutvā pañcasikho devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ pāturahosi. So vehāsaṃ abbhuggantvā ākāse antalikkhe pallaṅkena nisīdi. Seyyathāpi, bhante, balavā puriso supaccatthate vā pallaṅke same vā bhūmibhāge pallaṅkena nisīdeyya; evameva kho, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro vehāsaṃ abbhuggantvā ākāse antalikkhe pallaṅkena nisīditvā devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ sampasādaṃ viditvā imāhi gāthāhi anumodi –

"Venerable sir, for whichever deva Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra sits on the seat, that deva obtains great acquisition of delight; that deva obtains great acquisition of gladness. Just as, venerable sir, a Khattiya king, consecrated by sprinkling, newly anointed to sovereignty, obtains great acquisition of delight, obtains great acquisition of gladness, so too, venerable sir, for whichever deva Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra sits on the seat, that deva obtains great acquisition of delight; that deva obtains great acquisition of gladness. Then, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, having manifested a gross form, appearing as a youth with five topknots, manifested himself to the devas of Tāvatiṃsa. Rising into the air, he sat cross-legged in the sky. Just as, venerable sir, a strong man might sit cross-legged on a well-covered seat or on level ground, so too, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, having risen into the air, sat cross-legged in the sky. Understanding the satisfaction of the devas of Tāvatiṃsa, he rejoiced with these verses:"

‘‘Modanti vata bho devā, tāvatiṃsā sahindakā;Tathāgataṃ namassantā, dhammassa ca sudhammataṃ.

"Indeed, sirs, the devas rejoice, the devas of Tāvatiṃsa, together with Indra, paying homage to the Tathāgata and the well-proclaimed nature of the Dhamma."

‘‘Nave deve ca passantā, vaṇṇavante yasassine;Sugatasmiṃ brahmacariyaṃ, caritvāna idhāgate.

"Seeing the new devas, beautiful and glorious, having lived the holy life under the Sugata, they have come here."

‘‘Te aññe atirocanti, vaṇṇena yasasāyunā;Sāvakā bhūripaññassa, visesūpagatā idha.

"They surpass others in beauty, glory, and lifespan; Disciples of the one with vast wisdom, they attain distinction here."

‘‘Idaṃ disvāna nandanti, tāvatiṃsā sahindakā;Tathāgataṃ namassantā, dhammassa ca sudhammata’’nti.

"Seeing this, the devas of Tāvatiṃsa rejoice, together with Indra, paying homage to the Tathāgata, and to the well-proclaimed nature of the Dhamma."

285. ‘Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsittha; imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmuno sanaṅkumārassa bhāsato aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato saro hoti vissaṭṭho ca viññeyyo ca mañju ca savanīyo ca bindu ca avisārī ca gambhīro ca ninnādī ca. Yathāparisaṃ kho pana, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro sarena viññāpeti; na cassa bahiddhā parisāya ghoso niccharati. Yassa kho pana, bhante, evaṃ aṭṭhaṅgasamannāgato saro hoti, so vuccati ‘‘brahmassaro’’ti.

285.'This is the meaning, venerable sir, that Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra spoke; this is the meaning, venerable sir, that when Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra speaks, his voice is endowed with eight qualities: clear, comprehensible, sweet, audible, coherent, unscattered, deep, and resonant. And, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra makes himself understood to each assembly with his voice, yet no sound from him outside the assembly is heard. Venerable sir, one whose voice is endowed with these eight qualities is called "the voice of Brahmā."'

‘Atha kho, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro tettiṃse attabhāve abhinimminitvā devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ paccekapallaṅkesu pallaṅkena [paccekapallaṅkena (ka.)] nisīditvā deve tāvatiṃse āmantesi – ‘‘taṃ kiṃ maññanti, bhonto devā tāvatiṃsā, yāvañca so bhagavā bahujanahitāya paṭipanno bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānaṃ. Ye hi keci, bho, buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gatā sīlesu paripūrakārino te kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā appekacce paranimmitavasavattīnaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjanti, appekacce nimmānaratīnaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjanti, appekacce tusitānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjanti, appekacce yāmānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjanti, appekacce tāvatiṃsānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjanti, appekacce cātumahārājikānaṃ devānaṃ sahabyataṃ upapajjanti. Ye sabbanihīnaṃ kāyaṃ paripūrenti, te gandhabbakāyaṃ paripūrentī’’’ti.

Then, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, having manifested thirty-three apparitions, sat on each seat among the devas of Tāvatiṃsa, seated cross-legged, and addressed them: “What do you think, venerable sirs, devas of Tāvatiṃsa? To what extent has the Blessed One proceeded for the welfare of the many, for the happiness of the many, out of compassion for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of devas and humans? Indeed, sirs, whoever has gone for refuge to the Buddha, gone for refuge to the Dhamma, gone for refuge to the Saṅgha, and is a perfecter of virtue—some, after the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn into companionship with the devas who control what is created by others; some are reborn into companionship with the devas who delight in creation; some are reborn into companionship with the Tusita devas; some are reborn into companionship with the Yāma devas; some are reborn into companionship with the Tāvatiṃsa devas; some are reborn into companionship with the devas of the Four Great Kings. Those who perfectly fulfill the lowest kind of body are reborn among the gandhabbas.”

286. ‘Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsittha; imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmuno sanaṅkumārassa bhāsato ghosoyeva devā maññanti – ‘‘yvāyaṃ mama pallaṅke svāyaṃ ekova bhāsatī’’ti.

286.“This is the meaning, venerable sir, that Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra spoke. This is the meaning, venerable sir, that when Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra spoke, the devas perceived it as merely a sound, thinking: ‘Only he who sits on my throne speaks.’”

Ekasmiṃ bhāsamānasmiṃ, sabbe bhāsanti nimmitā;Ekasmiṃ tuṇhimāsīne, sabbe tuṇhī bhavanti te.

When one speaks, all the created speak; When one sits silent, all become silent.

Tadāsu devā maññanti, tāvatiṃsā sahindakā;Yvāyaṃ mama pallaṅkasmiṃ, svāyaṃ ekova bhāsatīti.

Then the devas think, the devas of Tāvatiṃsa, together with Indra: ‘Only he who sits on my throne speaks.’

‘Atha kho, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro ekattena attānaṃ upasaṃharati, ekattena attānaṃ upasaṃharitvā sakkassa devānamindassa pallaṅke pallaṅkena nisīditvā deve tāvatiṃse āmantesi –

Then, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra manifested a single form. Having manifested a single form, he sat on the throne of Sakka, the lord of the devas, and addressed the devas of Tāvatiṃsa:

## Bhāvitaiddhipādo

### One Who Has Developed the Bases of Spiritual Power

287. ‘‘‘Taṃ kiṃ maññanti, bhonto devā tāvatiṃsā, yāva supaññattā cime tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena cattāro iddhipādā paññattā iddhipahutāya [iddhibahulīkatāya (syā.)] iddhivisavitāya [iddhivisevitāya (syā.)] iddhivikubbanatāya. Katame cattāro? Idha bho bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Vīriyasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Cittasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Vīmaṃsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṃ iddhipādaṃ bhāveti. Ime kho, bho, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena cattāro iddhipādā paññattā iddhipahutāya iddhivisavitāya iddhivikubbanatāya.

287.“‘What do you think, friends, do the Tāvatiṃsa devas consider these four bases of spiritual power well-proclaimed by that Blessed One—the Knower, the Seer, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One—for the abundance of spiritual power, for the mastery of spiritual power, for the transformation of spiritual power? Which four? Here, friends, a bhikkhu develops the basis of spiritual power endowed with samādhi of zeal and volitional formations of exertion. He develops the basis of spiritual power endowed with samādhi of energy and volitional formations of exertion. He develops the basis of spiritual power endowed with samādhi of mind and volitional formations of exertion. He develops the basis of spiritual power endowed with samādhi of investigation and volitional formations of exertion. These, friends, are the four bases of spiritual power proclaimed by that Blessed One—the Knower, the Seer, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One—for the abundance of spiritual power, for the mastery of spiritual power, for the transformation of spiritual power.’”

‘‘‘Ye hi keci bho atītamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhosuṃ, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Yepi hi keci bho anāgatamaddhānaṃ samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhossanti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Yepi hi keci bho etarahi samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā anekavihitaṃ iddhividhaṃ paccanubhonti, sabbe te imesaṃyeva catunnaṃ iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā. Passanti no bhonto devā tāvatiṃsā mamapimaṃ evarūpaṃ iddhānubhāva’’nti? ‘‘Evaṃ mahābrahme’’ti. ‘‘Ahampi kho bho imesaṃyeva catunnañca iddhipādānaṃ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā evaṃ mahiddhiko evaṃmahānubhāvo’’ti. Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsittha. Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsitvā deve tāvatiṃse āmantesi –

“‘Whatever ascetics or brahmins in the past, friends, have experienced various kinds of spiritual power, all of them have done so by developing and cultivating these four bases of spiritual power. Whatever ascetics or brahmins in the future will experience various kinds of spiritual power, all of them will do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of spiritual power. Whatever ascetics or brahmins at present experience various kinds of spiritual power, all of them do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of spiritual power. Do the Tāvatiṃsa devas see such a display of spiritual power in me?’ ‘Yes, Great Brahmā.’ ‘And I too, friends, by developing and cultivating these four bases of spiritual power, am of such great spiritual power and great might.’ This, Venerable Sir, is what Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra said. Having said this, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra addressed the Tāvatiṃsa devas:

## Tividho okāsādhigamo

### The Threefold Attainment of Opportunity

288. ‘‘‘Taṃ kiṃ maññanti, bhonto devā tāvatiṃsā, yāvañcidaṃ tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena tayo okāsādhigamā anubuddhā sukhassādhigamāya. Katame tayo? Idha bho ekacco saṃsaṭṭho viharati kāmehi saṃsaṭṭho akusalehi dhammehi. So aparena samayena ariyadhammaṃ suṇāti, yoniso manasi karoti, dhammānudhammaṃ paṭipajjati. So ariyadhammassavanaṃ āgamma yonisomanasikāraṃ dhammānudhammappaṭipattiṃ asaṃsaṭṭho viharati kāmehi asaṃsaṭṭho akusalehi dhammehi. Tassa asaṃsaṭṭhassa kāmehi asaṃsaṭṭhassa akusalehi dhammehi uppajjati sukhaṃ, sukhā bhiyyo somanassaṃ. Seyyathāpi, bho, pamudā pāmojjaṃ [pāmujjaṃ (pī. ka.)] jāyetha, evameva kho, bho, asaṃsaṭṭhassa kāmehi asaṃsaṭṭhassa akusalehi dhammehi uppajjati sukhaṃ, sukhā bhiyyo somanassaṃ. Ayaṃ kho, bho, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena paṭhamo okāsādhigamo anubuddho sukhassādhigamāya.

288.“‘What do you think, friends, do the Tāvatiṃsa devas consider to what extent these three attainments of opportunity for the attainment of happiness have been realized by that Blessed One—the Knower, the Seer, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One? Which three? Here, friends, a certain person lives associated with sensual pleasures, associated with unwholesome states. Then, at a later time, he hears the noble Dhamma, attends to it wisely, and practices in accordance with the Dhamma. Through hearing the noble Dhamma, wise attention, and practice in accordance with the Dhamma, he lives unassociated with sensual pleasures, unassociated with unwholesome states. For him, living unassociated with sensual pleasures, unassociated with unwholesome states, happiness arises, and from happiness, still more joy. Just as, friends, gladness and rejoicing might arise, even so, friends, for one living unassociated with sensual pleasures, unassociated with unwholesome states, happiness arises, and from happiness, still more joy. This, friends, is the first attainment of opportunity realized by that Blessed One—the Knower, the Seer, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One—for the attainment of happiness.

‘‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bho, idhekaccassa oḷārikā kāyasaṅkhārā appaṭippassaddhā honti, oḷārikā vacīsaṅkhārā appaṭippassaddhā honti, oḷārikā cittasaṅkhārā appaṭippassaddhā honti. So aparena samayena ariyadhammaṃ suṇāti, yoniso manasi karoti, dhammānudhammaṃ paṭipajjati. Tassa ariyadhammassavanaṃ āgamma yonisomanasikāraṃ dhammānudhammappaṭipattiṃ oḷārikā kāyasaṅkhārā paṭippassambhanti, oḷārikā vacīsaṅkhārā paṭippassambhanti, oḷārikā cittasaṅkhārā paṭippassambhanti. Tassa oḷārikānaṃ kāyasaṅkhārānaṃ paṭippassaddhiyā oḷārikānaṃ vacīsaṅkhārānaṃ paṭippassaddhiyā oḷārikānaṃ cittasaṅkhārānaṃ paṭippassaddhiyā uppajjati sukhaṃ, sukhā bhiyyo somanassaṃ. Seyyathāpi, bho, pamudā pāmojjaṃ jāyetha, evameva kho bho oḷārikānaṃ kāyasaṅkhārānaṃ paṭippassaddhiyā oḷārikānaṃ vacīsaṅkhārānaṃ paṭippassaddhiyā oḷārikānaṃ cittasaṅkhārānaṃ paṭippassaddhiyā uppajjati sukhaṃ, sukhā bhiyyo somanassaṃ. Ayaṃ kho, bho, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena dutiyo okāsādhigamo anubuddho sukhassādhigamāya.

“‘Furthermore, friends, in this case, some individuals have gross bodily formations that are not stilled, gross verbal formations that are not stilled, and gross mental formations that are not stilled. Later, they hear the noble Dhamma, attend to it wisely, and practice in accordance with the Dhamma. Through hearing the noble Dhamma, wise attention, and practice in accordance with the Dhamma, their gross bodily formations become stilled, their gross verbal formations become stilled, and their gross mental formations become stilled. With the stilling of their gross bodily formations, the stilling of their gross verbal formations, and the stilling of their gross mental formations, happiness arises, and from happiness, still more joy. Just as, friends, gladness and rejoicing might arise, even so, friends, with the stilling of gross bodily formations, the stilling of gross verbal formations, and the stilling of gross mental formations, happiness arises, and from happiness, still more joy. This, friends, is the second attainment of opportunity realized by that Blessed One—the Knower, the Seer, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One—for the attainment of happiness.

‘‘‘Puna caparaṃ, bho, idhekacco ‘idaṃ kusala’nti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti, ‘idaṃ akusala’nti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. ‘Idaṃ sāvajjaṃ idaṃ anavajjaṃ, idaṃ sevitabbaṃ idaṃ na sevitabbaṃ, idaṃ hīnaṃ idaṃ paṇītaṃ, idaṃ kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāga’nti yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. So aparena samayena ariyadhammaṃ suṇāti, yoniso manasi karoti, dhammānudhammaṃ paṭipajjati. So ariyadhammassavanaṃ āgamma yonisomanasikāraṃ dhammānudhammappaṭipattiṃ, ‘idaṃ kusala’nti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘idaṃ akusala’nti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Idaṃ sāvajjaṃ idaṃ anavajjaṃ, idaṃ sevitabbaṃ idaṃ na sevitabbaṃ, idaṃ hīnaṃ idaṃ paṇītaṃ, idaṃ kaṇhasukkasappaṭibhāga’nti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Tassa evaṃ jānato evaṃ passato avijjā pahīyati, vijjā uppajjati. Tassa avijjāvirāgā vijjuppādā uppajjati sukhaṃ, sukhā bhiyyo somanassaṃ. Seyyathāpi, bho, pamudā pāmojjaṃ jāyetha, evameva kho, bho, avijjāvirāgā vijjuppādā uppajjati sukhaṃ, sukhā bhiyyo somanassaṃ. Ayaṃ kho, bho, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena tatiyo okāsādhigamo anubuddho sukhassādhigamāya. Ime kho, bho, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena tayo okāsādhigamā anubuddhā sukhassādhigamāyā’’ti. Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsittha, imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsitvā deve tāvatiṃse āmantesi –

“‘Furthermore, friends, in this case, some individuals do not truly understand what is skillful and what is unskillful, what is blameworthy and what is blameless, what should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated, what is inferior and what is excellent, what is dark and bright with their counterparts. Later, they hear the noble Dhamma, attend to it wisely, and practice in accordance with the Dhamma. Through hearing the noble Dhamma, wise attention, and practice in accordance with the Dhamma, they truly understand what is skillful and what is unskillful, what is blameworthy and what is blameless, what should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated, what is inferior and what is excellent, what is dark and bright with their counterparts. When they know and see thus, ignorance is abandoned and true knowledge arises. With the fading away of ignorance and the arising of true knowledge, happiness arises, and from happiness, still more joy. Just as, friends, gladness and rejoicing might arise, even so, friends, with the fading away of ignorance and the arising of true knowledge, happiness arises, and from happiness, still more joy. This, friends, is the third attainment of opportunity realized by that Blessed One—the Knower, the Seer, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One—for the attainment of happiness. These, friends, are the three attainments of opportunity realized by that Blessed One—the Knower, the Seer, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One—for the attainment of happiness.’ This, Venerable Sir, is what Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra said. Having said this, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra addressed the Tāvatiṃsa devas:

## Catusatipaṭṭhānaṃ

### The Four Establishments of Mindfulness.

289. ‘‘‘Taṃ kiṃ maññanti, bhonto devā tāvatiṃsā, yāva supaññattā cime tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena cattāro satipaṭṭhānā paññattā kusalassādhigamāya. Katame cattāro? Idha, bho, bhikkhu ajjhattaṃ kāye kāyānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. Ajjhattaṃ kāye kāyānupassī viharanto tattha sammā samādhiyati, sammā vippasīdati. So tattha sammā samāhito sammā vippasanno bahiddhā parakāye ñāṇadassanaṃ abhinibbatteti. Ajjhattaṃ vedanāsu vedanānupassī viharati…pe… bahiddhā paravedanāsu ñāṇadassanaṃ abhinibbatteti. Ajjhattaṃ citte cittānupassī viharati…pe… bahiddhā paracitte ñāṇadassanaṃ abhinibbatteti. Ajjhattaṃ dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ. Ajjhattaṃ dhammesu dhammānupassī viharanto tattha sammā samādhiyati, sammā vippasīdati. So tattha sammā samāhito sammā vippasanno bahiddhā paradhammesu ñāṇadassanaṃ abhinibbatteti. Ime kho, bho, tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena cattāro satipaṭṭhānā paññattā kusalassādhigamāyā’’ti. Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsittha. Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsitvā deve tāvatiṃse āmantesi –

289.‘What do you think, friends, Tāvatiṃsa devas? How well proclaimed are these four establishments of mindfulness by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, who knows and sees, for the attainment of the wholesome. What are the four? Here, friends, a monk dwells contemplating the body in the body internally—ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. Dwelling contemplating the body in the body internally—there he rightly concentrates, rightly clarifies. Being rightly collected and rightly clarified there, he generates knowledge and vision externally regarding another’s body. He dwells contemplating feelings in feelings internally… generates knowledge and vision externally regarding another’s feelings. He dwells contemplating mind in mind internally… generates knowledge and vision externally regarding another’s mind. He dwells contemplating phenomena in phenomena internally—ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. Dwelling contemplating phenomena in phenomena internally—there he rightly concentrates, rightly clarifies. Being rightly collected and rightly clarified there, he generates knowledge and vision externally regarding another’s phenomena. These, friends, are the four establishments of mindfulness proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, who knows and sees, for the attainment of the wholesome.’ This matter, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra spoke. This matter, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, having spoken, addressed the Tāvatiṃsa devas—

## Satta samādhiparikkhārā

### Seven Accessories to samādhi.

290. ‘‘‘Taṃ kiṃ maññanti, bhonto devā tāvatiṃsā, yāva supaññattā cime tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena satta samādhiparikkhārā sammāsamādhissa paribhāvanāya sammāsamādhissa pāripūriyā. Katame satta? Sammādiṭṭhi sammāsaṅkappo sammāvācā sammākammanto sammāājīvo sammāvāyāmo sammāsati. Yā kho, bho, imehi sattahaṅgehi cittassa ekaggatā parikkhatā, ayaṃ vuccati, bho, ariyo sammāsamādhi saupaniso itipi saparikkhāro itipi. Sammādiṭṭhissa bho, sammāsaṅkappo pahoti, sammāsaṅkappassa sammāvācā pahoti, sammāvācassa sammākammanto pahoti. Sammākammantassa sammāājīvo pahoti, sammāājīvassa sammāvāyāmo pahoti, sammāvāyāmassa sammāsati pahoti, sammāsatissa sammāsamādhi pahoti, sammāsamādhissa sammāñāṇaṃ pahoti, sammāñāṇassa sammāvimutti pahoti. Yañhi taṃ, bho, sammā vadamāno vadeyya – ‘svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhi apārutā amatassa dvārā’ti idameva taṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya. Svākkhāto hi, bho, bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko, akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhi apārutā amatassa dvārā [dvārāti (syā. ka.)].

290.‘What do you think, friends, Tāvatiṃsa devas? How well proclaimed are these seven accessories to samādhi by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, who knows and sees, for the development and fulfillment of right samādhi? Which seven? Right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness. When, friends, the singleness of mind is attended by these seven factors, this is called noble right samādhi with its supports and its accessories. For one established in right view, friends, right intention arises; for one with right intention, right speech arises; for one with right speech, right action arises; for one with right action, right livelihood arises; for one with right livelihood, right effort arises; for one with right effort, right mindfulness arises; for one with right mindfulness, right samādhi arises; for one with right samādhi, right knowledge arises; for one with right knowledge, right liberation arises. Indeed, friends, if one were to speak rightly, one would say: ‘The Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, visible here and now, timeless, inviting one to come and see, leading onward, to be experienced individually by the wise, with the doors to the Deathless opened.’ This is what one would rightly say. For, friends, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, visible here and now, timeless, inviting one to come and see, leading onward, to be experienced individually by the wise, with the doors to the Deathless opened.’

‘‘‘Ye hi keci, bho, buddhe aveccappasādena samannāgatā, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgatā, saṅghe aveccappasādena samannāgatā, ariyakantehi sīlehi samannāgatā, ye cime opapātikā dhammavinītā sātirekāni catuvīsatisatasahassāni māgadhakā paricārakā abbhatītā kālaṅkatā tiṇṇaṃ saṃyojanānaṃ parikkhayā sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyaṇā. Atthi cevettha sakadāgāmino.

‘Indeed, friends, those who possess unwavering faith in the Buddha, unwavering faith in the Dhamma, unwavering faith in the Saṅgha, and are endowed with virtues dear to the noble ones—and these spontaneously reborn beings, disciplined in the Dhamma, more than two million four hundred thousand attendants in Magadha, who have passed away—with the destruction of the three fetters, are stream-enterers, not subject to falling away, assured, destined for full enlightenment. And there are also once-returners here.

‘‘Atthāyaṃ [athāyaṃ (sī. syā.)] itarā pajā, puññābhāgāti me mano;Saṅkhātuṃ nopi sakkomi, musāvādassa ottappa’’nti.

‘This other generation exists for their benefit; my mind is that they are endowed with merit. I am unable to count them, out of moral dread of false speech.’

291. ‘Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro bhāsittha, imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmuno sanaṅkumārassa bhāsato vessavaṇassa mahārājassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi – ‘‘acchariyaṃ vata bho, abbhutaṃ vata bho, evarūpopi nāma uḷāro satthā bhavissati, evarūpaṃ uḷāraṃ dhammakkhānaṃ, evarūpā uḷārā visesādhigamā paññāyissantī’’ti. Atha, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro vessavaṇassa mahārājassa cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya vessavaṇaṃ mahārājānaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘taṃ kiṃ maññati bhavaṃ vessavaṇo mahārājā atītampi addhānaṃ evarūpo uḷāro satthā ahosi, evarūpaṃ uḷāraṃ dhammakkhānaṃ, evarūpā uḷārā visesādhigamā paññāyiṃsu. Anāgatampi addhānaṃ evarūpo uḷāro satthā bhavissati, evarūpaṃ uḷāraṃ dhammakkhānaṃ, evarūpā uḷārā visesādhigamā paññāyissantī’’’ti.

291.‘This matter, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra spoke. This matter, venerable sir, while Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra was speaking, this thought arose in the mind of the great king Vessavaṇa: “It is wonderful, indeed, it is marvelous, indeed, that such a sublime Teacher could exist, such a sublime Dhamma teaching could exist, such sublime attainments of distinction could be discerned.” Then, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, knowing with his mind the reflection in the mind of the great king Vessavaṇa, said to him: “What does the esteemed Vessavaṇa, the great king, think? In the past, too, such a sublime Teacher existed, such a sublime Dhamma teaching existed, such sublime attainments of distinction were discerned. In the future, too, such a sublime Teacher will exist, such a sublime Dhamma teaching will exist, such sublime attainments of distinction will be discerned.”’

292. ‘‘‘Imamatthaṃ, bhante, brahmā sanaṅkumāro devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ abhāsi, imamatthaṃ vessavaṇo mahārājā brahmuno sanaṅkumārassa devānaṃ tāvatiṃsānaṃ bhāsato sammukhā sutaṃ [sutvā (sī. pī.)] sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ sayaṃ parisāyaṃ ārocesi’’.

292.‘This matter, venerable sir, Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra spoke to the Tāvatiṃsa devas. The great king Vessavaṇa heard this matter in the presence of Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra as he spoke to the Tāvatiṃsa devas, received it in his presence, and he himself announced it in his own assembly.’

Imamatthaṃ janavasabho yakkho vessavaṇassa mahārājassa sayaṃ parisāyaṃ bhāsato sammukhā sutaṃ sammukhā paṭiggahitaṃ [paṭiggahetvā (sī. pī.)] bhagavato ārocesi. Imamatthaṃ bhagavā janavasabhassa yakkhassa sammukhā sutvā sammukhā paṭiggahetvā sāmañca abhiññāya āyasmato ānandassa ārocesi, imamatthamāyasmā ānando bhagavato sammukhā sutvā sammukhā paṭiggahetvā ārocesi bhikkhūnaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ upāsakānaṃ upāsikānaṃ. Tayidaṃ brahmacariyaṃ iddhañceva phītañca vitthārikaṃ bāhujaññaṃ puthubhūtaṃ yāva devamanussehi suppakāsitanti.

This matter was heard by the yakkha Janavasabha in King Vessavaṇa’s own assembly as he spoke, heard face to face and received face to face, and he reported it to the Blessed One. This matter, having been heard by the Blessed One from the yakkha Janavasabha face to face and received face to face, and having known it directly himself, he reported it to the Venerable Ānanda. This matter, having been heard by the Venerable Ānanda from the Blessed One face to face and received face to face, he reported it to the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. Thus this holy life has flourished, prospered, spread far and wide, become widespread, and has been well proclaimed among gods and humans.

## Janavasabhasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ pañcamaṃ.

### The Janavasabha Sutta, the fifth, is concluded.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:dn18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[DA4]] | D ii 200 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DA4]], [[THAG16]].9 |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[DN]]  / 🌐 [[DN18]]
> ◄  [[dn17-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[dn19-deepseek-pali]] ►
