---
sutta_code: "DN24"
sutta_title:
  - "Pāthika Sutta "
  - "About Pāṭikaputta"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[DN]]  / 🌐 [[DN24]]
> ◄  [[dn23-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[dn25-deepseek-pali]] ►

# Pāthikasuttaṃ

## The Pāthika Sutta

## Sunakkhattavatthu

### The Story of Sunakkhatta

1. Evaṃ me sutaṃ – ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā mallesu viharati anupiyaṃ nāma [anuppiyaṃ nāma (syā.)] mallānaṃ nigamo. Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya anupiyaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. Atha kho bhagavato etadahosi – ‘‘atippago kho tāva anupiyāyaṃ [anupiyaṃ (ka.)] piṇḍāya carituṃ. Yaṃnūnāhaṃ yena bhaggavagottassa paribbājakassa ārāmo, yena bhaggavagotto paribbājako tenupasaṅkameyya’’nti.

1. Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling among the Mallians at Anupiya, a town of the Mallians. Then, in the morning, the Blessed One having dressed, took his bowl and robe and entered Anupiya for alms. Then it occurred to the Blessed One: "It is still too early to walk for alms in Anupiya. Why don't I go to the hermitage of the wanderer Bhaggavagotta and approach the wanderer Bhaggavagotta?"

2. Atha kho bhagavā yena bhaggavagottassa paribbājakassa ārāmo, yena bhaggavagotto paribbājako tenupasaṅkami. Atha kho bhaggavagotto paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘etu kho, bhante, bhagavā. Svāgataṃ, bhante, bhagavato. Cirassaṃ kho, bhante, bhagavā imaṃ pariyāyamakāsi yadidaṃ idhāgamanāya. Nisīdatu, bhante, bhagavā, idamāsanaṃ paññatta’’nti. Nisīdi bhagavā paññatte āsane. Bhaggavagottopi kho paribbājako aññataraṃ nīcaṃ āsanaṃ gahetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho bhaggavagotto paribbājako bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘purimāni, bhante, divasāni purimatarāni sunakkhatto licchaviputto yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ etadavoca – ‘paccakkhāto dāni mayā, bhaggava, bhagavā. Na dānāhaṃ bhagavantaṃ uddissa viharāmī’ti. Kaccetaṃ, bhante, tatheva, yathā sunakkhatto licchaviputto avacā’’ti? ‘‘Tatheva kho etaṃ, bhaggava, yathā sunakkhatto licchaviputto avaca’’.

2. Then the Blessed One went to the hermitage of the wanderer Bhaggavagotta, and approached the wanderer Bhaggavagotta. Then the wanderer Bhaggavagotta said to the Blessed One: "Come, venerable sir, welcome! It has been a long time, venerable sir, since the Blessed One made an opportunity to come here. Please sit down, venerable sir; this seat is ready." The Blessed One sat down on the prepared seat. The wanderer Bhaggavagotta also took a low seat and sat to one side. Sitting to one side, the wanderer Bhaggavagotta said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, in days past, some time ago, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi came to me and said: 'Now, Bhaggava, I have renounced the Blessed One. I no longer live under the guidance of the Blessed One.' Venerable sir, is this as Sunakkhatta the Licchavi said?" "It is indeed so, Bhaggava, as Sunakkhatta the Licchavi said."

3. Purimāni, bhaggava, divasāni purimatarāni sunakkhatto licchaviputto yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto maṃ etadavoca – ‘paccakkhāmi dānāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ. Na dānāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ uddissa viharissāmī’ti. ‘Evaṃ vutte, ahaṃ, bhaggava, sunakkhattaṃ licchaviputtaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘api nu tāhaṃ, sunakkhatta, evaṃ avacaṃ, ehi tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, mamaṃ uddissa viharāhī’ti? ‘No hetaṃ, bhante’. ‘Tvaṃ vā pana maṃ evaṃ avaca – ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ uddissa viharissāmī’ti? ‘No hetaṃ, bhante’. ‘Iti kira, sunakkhatta, nevāhaṃ taṃ vadāmi – ehi tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, mamaṃ uddissa viharāhīti. Napi kira maṃ tvaṃ vadesi – ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ uddissa viharissāmīti. Evaṃ sante, moghapurisa, ko santo kaṃ paccācikkhasi? Passa, moghapurisa, yāvañca [yāva ca (ka.)] te idaṃ aparaddha’nti.

3. In days past, some time ago, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son came to me, paid homage, and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son said this to me: ‘Now, venerable sir, I renounce the Blessed One. I will no longer, venerable sir, live under the guidance of the Blessed One.’ When this was said, Bhaggava, I said this to Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son: ‘Did I ever say to you, Sunakkhatta, "Come, Sunakkhatta, live under my guidance"?’ ‘No, venerable sir.’ ‘Or did you ever say to me: "Venerable sir, I will live under the guidance of the Blessed One"?’ ‘No, venerable sir.’ ‘So then, Sunakkhatta, neither did I say to you: "Come, Sunakkhatta, live under my guidance," nor did you say to me: "Venerable sir, I will live under the guidance of the Blessed One." In that case, foolish man, who is renouncing whom? See, foolish man, how much you have wronged yourself.’

4. ‘Na hi pana me, bhante, bhagavā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karotī’ti. ‘Api nu tāhaṃ, sunakkhatta, evaṃ avacaṃ – ehi tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, mamaṃ uddissa viharāhi, ahaṃ te uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissāmī’ti? ‘No hetaṃ, bhante’. ‘Tvaṃ vā pana maṃ evaṃ avaca – ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ uddissa viharissāmi, bhagavā me uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissatī’ti? ‘No hetaṃ, bhante’. ‘Iti kira, sunakkhatta, nevāhaṃ taṃ vadāmi – ehi tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, mamaṃ uddissa viharāhi, ahaṃ te uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissāmī’ti; napi kira maṃ tvaṃ vadesi – ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ uddissa viharissāmi, bhagavā me uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissatī’ti. Evaṃ sante, moghapurisa, ko santo kaṃ paccācikkhasi? Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sunakkhatta, kate vā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriye akate vā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriye yassatthāya mayā dhammo desito so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’ti? ‘Kate vā, bhante, uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriye akate vā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriye yassatthāya bhagavatā dhammo desito so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’ti. ‘Iti kira, sunakkhatta, kate vā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriye, akate vā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriye, yassatthāya mayā dhammo desito, so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāya. Tatra, sunakkhatta, kiṃ uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ kataṃ karissati? Passa, moghapurisa, yāvañca te idaṃ aparaddha’nti.

4. ‘But, venerable sir, the Blessed One does not perform any superhuman feat of psychic power for me.’ ‘Did I ever say to you, Sunakkhatta, “Come, Sunakkhatta, live under my guidance, and I will perform superhuman feats of psychic power for you”?’ ‘No, venerable sir.’ ‘Or did you say to me, “Venerable sir, I will live under the guidance of the Blessed One, and the Blessed One will perform superhuman feats of psychic power for me”?’ ‘No, venerable sir.’ ‘So then, Sunakkhatta, neither did I say to you, “Come, Sunakkhatta, live under my guidance, and I will perform superhuman feats of psychic power for you,” nor did you say to me, “Venerable sir, I will live under the guidance of the Blessed One, and the Blessed One will perform superhuman feats of psychic power for me.” In that case, foolish man, who is renouncing whom? What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Whether superhuman feats of psychic power are performed or not, does the Dhamma I teach lead to the complete destruction of suffering for one who practices it rightly?’ ‘Whether superhuman feats of psychic power are performed or not, venerable sir, the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One leads to the complete destruction of suffering for one who practices it rightly.’ ‘So then, Sunakkhatta, whether superhuman feats of psychic power are performed or not, the Dhamma I teach leads to the complete destruction of suffering for one who practices it rightly. In that case, Sunakkhatta, what purpose would performing superhuman feats of psychic power serve? See, foolish man, how much you have wronged yourself.’

5. ‘Na hi pana me, bhante, bhagavā aggaññaṃ paññapetī’ti [paññāpetīti (pī.)]? ‘Api nu tāhaṃ, sunakkhatta, evaṃ avacaṃ – ehi tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, mamaṃ uddissa viharāhi, ahaṃ te aggaññaṃ paññapessāmī’ti? ‘No hetaṃ, bhante’. ‘Tvaṃ vā pana maṃ evaṃ avaca – ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ uddissa viharissāmi, bhagavā me aggaññaṃ paññapessatī’ti? ‘No hetaṃ, bhante’. ‘Iti kira, sunakkhatta, nevāhaṃ taṃ vadāmi – ehi tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, mamaṃ uddissa viharāhi, ahaṃ te aggaññaṃ paññapessāmīti. Napi kira maṃ tvaṃ vadesi – ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavantaṃ uddissa viharissāmi, bhagavā me aggaññaṃ paññapessatī’ti. Evaṃ sante, moghapurisa, ko santo kaṃ paccācikkhasi? Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sunakkhatta, paññatte vā aggaññe, apaññatte vā aggaññe, yassatthāya mayā dhammo desito, so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’ti? ‘Paññatte vā, bhante, aggaññe, apaññatte vā aggaññe, yassatthāya bhagavatā dhammo desito, so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’ti. ‘Iti kira, sunakkhatta, paññatte vā aggaññe, apaññatte vā aggaññe, yassatthāya mayā dhammo desito, so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāya. Tatra, sunakkhatta, kiṃ aggaññaṃ paññattaṃ karissati? Passa, moghapurisa, yāvañca te idaṃ aparaddhaṃ’.

5. ‘But, venerable sir, the Blessed One does not declare the primeval teaching to me.’ ‘Did I ever say to you, Sunakkhatta, “Come, Sunakkhatta, live under my guidance, and I will declare the primeval teaching to you”?’ ‘No, venerable sir.’ ‘Or did you say to me, “Venerable sir, I will live under the guidance of the Blessed One, and the Blessed One will declare the primeval teaching to me”?’ ‘No, venerable sir.’ ‘So then, Sunakkhatta, neither did I say to you, “Come, Sunakkhatta, live under my guidance, and I will declare the primeval teaching to you,” nor did you say to me, “Venerable sir, I will live under the guidance of the Blessed One, and the Blessed One will declare the primeval teaching to me.” In that case, foolish man, who is renouncing whom? What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Whether the primeval teaching is declared or not, does the Dhamma I teach lead to the complete destruction of suffering for one who practices it rightly?’ ‘Whether the primeval teaching is declared or not, venerable sir, the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One leads to the complete destruction of suffering for one who practices it rightly.’ ‘So then, Sunakkhatta, whether the primeval teaching is declared or not, the Dhamma I teach leads to the complete destruction of suffering for one who practices it rightly. In that case, Sunakkhatta, what purpose would declaring the primeval teaching serve? See, foolish man, how much you have wronged yourself.’

6. ‘Anekapariyāyena kho te, sunakkhatta, mama vaṇṇo bhāsito vajjigāme – itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavāti. Iti kho te, sunakkhatta, anekapariyāyena mama vaṇṇo bhāsito vajjigāme.

6. "In many ways, Sunakkhatta, my praise has been spoken in the Vajjian capital: 'The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.' Thus, Sunakkhatta, in many ways my praise has been spoken in the Vajjian capital."

‘Anekapariyāyena kho te, sunakkhatta, dhammassa vaṇṇo bhāsito vajjigāme – svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opaneyyiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhīti. Iti kho te, sunakkhatta, anekapariyāyena dhammassa vaṇṇo bhāsito vajjigāme.

In many ways, Sunakkhatta, praise for the Dhamma has been spoken in the Vajjian capital: ‘The Dhamma is well-expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, leading inwards, to be personally experienced by the wise.’ Thus, Sunakkhatta, in many ways praise for the Dhamma has been spoken in the Vajjian capital.

‘Anekapariyāyena kho te, sunakkhatta, saṅghassa vaṇṇo bhāsito vajjigāme – suppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ujuppaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, ñāyappaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, sāmīcippaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, yadidaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā, esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho, āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassāti. Iti kho te, sunakkhatta, anekapariyāyena saṅghassa vaṇṇo bhāsito vajjigāme.

In many ways, Sunakkhatta, praise for the Sangha has been spoken in the Vajjian capital: ‘The Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight individuals—this is the Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples. They are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’ Thus, Sunakkhatta, in many ways praise for the Sangha has been spoken in the Vajjian capital.

‘Ārocayāmi kho te, sunakkhatta, paṭivedayāmi kho te, sunakkhatta. Bhavissanti kho te, sunakkhatta, vattāro, no visahi sunakkhatto licchaviputto samaṇe gotame brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ, so avisahanto sikkhaṃ paccakkhāya hīnāyāvattoti. Iti kho te, sunakkhatta, bhavissanti vattāro’ti.

"I declare to you, Sunakkhatta, I proclaim to you, Sunakkhatta, there will be those who will say: ‘Sunakkhatta the Licchavi was not able to live the holy life under the ascetic Gotama; being unable, he renounced the training and reverted to the lower life.’ Thus, Sunakkhatta, there will be those who will say this."

Evaṃ pi kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto mayā vuccamāno apakkameva imasmā dhammavinayā, yathā taṃ āpāyiko nerayiko.

Even so, Bhaggava, when I spoke thus to Sunakkhatta the Licchavi, he departed from this Dhamma and Discipline, as one destined for the lower realms, for hell.

## Korakkhattiyavatthu

### The Story of Korakkhattiya

7. ‘‘Ekamidāhaṃ, bhaggava, samayaṃ thūlūsu [bumūsu (sī. pī.)] viharāmi uttarakā nāma thūlūnaṃ nigamo. Atha khvāhaṃ, bhaggava, pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sunakkhattena licchaviputtena pacchāsamaṇena uttarakaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisiṃ. Tena kho pana samayena acelo korakkhattiyo kukkuravatiko catukkuṇḍiko [catukuṇḍiko (sī. pī.) catukoṇḍiko (syā. ka.)] chamānikiṇṇaṃ bhakkhasaṃ mukheneva khādati, mukheneva bhuñjati. Addasā kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto acelaṃ korakkhattiyaṃ kukkuravatikaṃ catukkuṇḍikaṃ chamānikiṇṇaṃ bhakkhasaṃ mukheneva khādantaṃ mukheneva bhuñjantaṃ. Disvānassa etadahosi – ‘sādhurūpo vata, bho, ayaṃ [arahaṃ (sī. syā. pī.)] samaṇo catukkuṇḍiko chamānikiṇṇaṃ bhakkhasaṃ mukheneva khādati, mukheneva bhuñjatī’ti.

7. "On one occasion, Bhaggava, I was staying among the Thūlus, in a town of the Thūlus named Uttarakā. Then, Bhaggava, in the morning I dressed, took my bowl and robe, and entered Uttarakā for alms with Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son following behind as my attendant. At that time, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Korakkhattiya, who practiced the dog-duty, was on all fours, eating and consuming food scattered on the ground with his mouth alone. Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son saw the naked ascetic Korakkhattiya, who practiced the dog-duty, on all fours, eating and consuming food scattered on the ground with his mouth alone. Seeing this, he thought: 'How admirable, friends, is this ascetic, on all fours, eating and consuming food scattered on the ground with his mouth alone!'"

‘‘Atha khvāhaṃ, bhaggava, sunakkhattassa licchaviputtassa cetasā cetoparivitakkamaññāya sunakkhattaṃ licchaviputtaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘tvampi nāma, moghapurisa, samaṇo sakyaputtiyo [moghapurisa sakyaputtiyo (sī. syā. pī.)] paṭijānissasī’ti! ‘Kiṃ pana maṃ, bhante, bhagavā evamāha – ‘tvampi nāma, moghapurisa, samaṇo sakyaputtiyo [moghapurisa sakyaputtiyo (sī. syā. pī.)] paṭijānissasī’ti? ‘Nanu te, sunakkhatta, imaṃ acelaṃ korakkhattiyaṃ kukkuravatikaṃ catukkuṇḍikaṃ chamānikiṇṇaṃ bhakkhasaṃ mukheneva khādantaṃ mukheneva bhuñjantaṃ disvāna etadahosi – sādhurūpo vata, bho, ayaṃ samaṇo catukkuṇḍiko chamānikiṇṇaṃ bhakkhasaṃ mukheneva khādati, mukheneva bhuñjatī’ti? ‘Evaṃ, bhante. Kiṃ pana, bhante, bhagavā arahattassa maccharāyatī’ti? ‘Na kho ahaṃ, moghapurisa, arahattassa maccharāyāmi. Api ca, tuyhevetaṃ pāpakaṃ diṭṭhigataṃ uppannaṃ, taṃ pajaha. Mā te ahosi dīgharattaṃ ahitāya dukkhāya. Yaṃ kho panetaṃ, sunakkhatta, maññasi acelaṃ korakkhattiyaṃ – sādhurūpo ayaṃ samaṇoti [maññasi ‘‘acelo korakhattiyo sādhurūpo arahaṃ samaṇoti’’ (syā.)]. So sattamaṃ divasaṃ alasakena kālaṅkarissati. Kālaṅkato [kālakato (sī. syā. pī.)] ca kālakañcikā [kālakañjā (sī. pī.), kālakañjikā (syā.)] nāma asurā sabbanihīno asurakāyo, tatra upapajjissati. Kālaṅkatañca naṃ bīraṇatthambake susāne chaḍḍessanti. Ākaṅkhamāno ca tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, acelaṃ korakkhattiyaṃ upasaṅkamitvā puccheyyāsi – jānāsi, āvuso korakkhattiya [acela korakhattiya (ka.)], attano gatinti? Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, sunakkhatta, vijjati yaṃ te acelo korakkhattiyo byākarissati – jānāmi, āvuso sunakkhatta, attano gatiṃ; kālakañcikā nāma asurā sabbanihīno asurakāyo, tatrāmhi upapannoti.

"Then, Bhaggava, knowing Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son’s thought with my mind, I said to Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son: ‘So, foolish man, you claim to be a follower of the Sakyan?’ ‘But why, Venerable Sir, does the Blessed One say this to me: "So, foolish man, you claim to be a follower of the Sakyan?"’ ‘Didn't you, Sunakkhatta, upon seeing this naked Korakkhattiya, who practiced the dog-duty, on all fours, eating and consuming food scattered on the ground with his mouth alone—think: "How admirable, friends, is this ascetic, on all fours, eating and consuming food scattered on the ground with his mouth alone!"?’ ‘Yes, Venerable Sir. But does the Blessed One begrudge arahantship?’ ‘I do not, foolish man, begrudge arahantship. However, this evil viewpoint has arisen in you—abandon it! Let it not lead to your harm and suffering for a long time. As for what you think, Sunakkhatta, concerning this naked Korakkhattiya: "This is an admirable ascetic"—he will meet his end on the seventh day from a stomach ailment. And after death, he will be reborn among the Kalakañjika Asuras, the lowest of the Asura hosts. And after he has died, they will throw him onto a heap of bīraṇa grass in the charnel ground. If you wish, Sunakkhatta, you may go to the naked Korakkhattiya and ask him: "Do you know, friend Korakkhattiya, your destination?" It is possible, Sunakkhatta, that the naked Korakkhattiya will declare to you: "I know, friend Sunakkhatta, my destination; I have been reborn among the Kalakañjika Asuras, the lowest of the Asura hosts."’"

‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto yena acelo korakkhattiyo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā acelaṃ korakkhattiyaṃ etadavoca – ‘byākato khosi, āvuso korakkhattiya, samaṇena gotamena – acelo korakkhattiyo sattamaṃ divasaṃ alasakena kālaṅkarissati. Kālaṅkato ca kālakañcikā nāma asurā sabbanihīno asurakāyo, tatra upapajjissati. Kālaṅkatañca naṃ bīraṇatthambake susāne chaḍḍessantī’ti. Yena tvaṃ, āvuso korakkhattiya, mattaṃ mattañca bhattaṃ bhuñjeyyāsi, mattaṃ mattañca pānīyaṃ piveyyāsi. Yathā samaṇassa gotamassa micchā assa vacana’nti.

Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son went to the naked Korakkhattiya. Having approached, he said to the naked Korakkhattiya: 'You have been declared, friend Korakkhattiya, by the ascetic Gotama—"The naked Korakkhattiya will meet his end on the seventh day from a stomach ailment. And after death, he will be reborn among the Kalakañjika Asuras, the lowest of the Asura hosts. And after he has died, they will throw him onto a heap of bīraṇa grass in the charnel ground." Therefore, friend Korakkhattiya, you should eat food in moderation and drink liquids in moderation, so that the ascetic Gotama's words may prove false.'"

8. ‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto ekadvīhikāya sattarattindivāni gaṇesi, yathā taṃ tathāgatassa asaddahamāno. Atha kho, bhaggava, acelo korakkhattiyo sattamaṃ divasaṃ alasakena kālamakāsi. Kālaṅkato ca kālakañcikā nāma asurā sabbanihīno asurakāyo, tatra upapajji. Kālaṅkatañca naṃ bīraṇatthambake susāne chaḍḍesuṃ.

8. Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son counted one day at a time for seven days and nights, as if disbelieving the Tathagata. Then, Bhaggava, the naked Korakkhattiya met his end on the seventh day from a stomach ailment. And after death, he was reborn among the Kalakañjika Asuras, the lowest of the Asura hosts. And they threw his dead body onto a heap of bīraṇa grass in the charnel ground.

9. ‘‘Assosi kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto – ‘acelo kira korakkhattiyo alasakena kālaṅkato bīraṇatthambake susāne chaḍḍito’ti. Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto yena bīraṇatthambakaṃ susānaṃ, yena acelo korakkhattiyo tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā acelaṃ korakkhattiyaṃ tikkhattuṃ pāṇinā ākoṭesi – ‘jānāsi, āvuso korakkhattiya, attano gati’nti? Atha kho, bhaggava, acelo korakkhattiyo pāṇinā piṭṭhiṃ paripuñchanto vuṭṭhāsi. ‘Jānāmi, āvuso sunakkhatta, attano gatiṃ. Kālakañcikā nāma asurā sabbanihīno asurakāyo, tatrāmhi upapanno’ti vatvā tattheva uttāno papati [paripati (syā. ka.)].

9. Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son heard that the naked Korakkhattiya had died from a stomach ailment and had been thrown onto a heap of bīraṇa grass in the charnel ground. Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son went to the charnel ground where the bīraṇa grass heap was, and approached the naked Korakkhattiya. Having approached, he struck the naked Korakkhattiya three times with his hand, saying, 'Friend Korakkhattiya, do you know your own destination?' Then, Bhaggava, the naked Korakkhattiya, wiping his back with his hand, got up. 'Friend Sunakkhatta, I know my own destination. I have been reborn among the Kalakañjika Asuras, the lowest of the Asura hosts.' Having said this, he fell back down supine right there.

10. ‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhaggava, sunakkhattaṃ licchaviputtaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sunakkhatta, yatheva te ahaṃ acelaṃ korakkhattiyaṃ ārabbha byākāsiṃ, tatheva taṃ vipākaṃ, aññathā vā’ti? ‘Yatheva me, bhante, bhagavā acelaṃ korakkhattiyaṃ ārabbha byākāsi, tatheva taṃ vipākaṃ, no aññathā’ti. ‘Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sunakkhatta, yadi evaṃ sante kataṃ vā hoti uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ, akataṃ vāti? ‘Addhā kho, bhante, evaṃ sante kataṃ hoti uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ, no akata’nti. ‘Evampi kho maṃ tvaṃ, moghapurisa, uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karontaṃ evaṃ vadesi – na hi pana me, bhante, bhagavā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karotīti. Passa, moghapurisa, yāvañca te idaṃ aparaddha’nti. ‘‘Evampi kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto mayā vuccamāno apakkameva imasmā dhammavinayā, yathā taṃ āpāyiko nerayiko.

10. Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son approached me; having approached, he paid homage to me and sat down to one side. Bhaggava, to Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son sitting to one side, I said this: ‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Just as I declared to you concerning the naked Korakkhattiya, has the result turned out just so, or otherwise?’ ‘Just as the Blessed One declared to me, venerable sir, concerning the naked Korakkhattiya, so has the result turned out, not otherwise.’ ‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If this is so, was a superhuman miracle of psychic power performed or not performed?’ ‘Surely, venerable sir, if this is so, a superhuman miracle of psychic power was performed, not unperformed.’ ‘Thus, you foolish man, though I was performing a superhuman miracle of psychic power, you say: “But, venerable sir, the Blessed One does not perform a superhuman miracle of psychic power.” See, foolish man, how much you have erred!’ Thus, Bhaggava, though being spoken to by me in this way, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son departed from this Dhamma and Discipline, as one liable to punishment, destined for hell.

## Acelakaḷāramaṭṭakavatthu

### The Story of Kalaramattaka the Naked Ascetic

11. ‘‘Ekamidāhaṃ, bhaggava, samayaṃ vesāliyaṃ viharāmi mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. Tena kho pana samayena acelo kaḷāramaṭṭako vesāliyaṃ paṭivasati lābhaggappatto ceva yasaggappatto ca vajjigāme. Tassa sattavatapadāni [sattavattapadāni (syā. pī.)] samattāni samādinnāni honti – ‘yāvajīvaṃ acelako assaṃ, na vatthaṃ paridaheyyaṃ, yāvajīvaṃ brahmacārī assaṃ, na methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseveyyaṃ, yāvajīvaṃ surāmaṃseneva yāpeyyaṃ, na odanakummāsaṃ bhuñjeyyaṃ. Puratthimena vesāliṃ udenaṃ nāma cetiyaṃ, taṃ nātikkameyyaṃ, dakkhiṇena vesāliṃ gotamakaṃ nāma cetiyaṃ, taṃ nātikkameyyaṃ, pacchimena vesāliṃ sattambaṃ nāma cetiyaṃ, taṃ nātikkameyyaṃ, uttarena vesāliṃ bahuputtaṃ nāma [bahuputtakaṃ nāma (syā.)] cetiyaṃ taṃ nātikkameyya’nti. So imesaṃ sattannaṃ vatapadānaṃ samādānahetu lābhaggappatto ceva yasaggappatto ca vajjigāme.

11. "Bhaggava, I recall once staying in Vesali, in the Great Wood at the hall with the peaked roof. At that time, the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka was living in Vesali, having reached the height of gain and fame in the Vajjian villages. He had completed and undertaken these seven ascetic rules: ‘For as long as I live I will be a naked ascetic; I will not wear clothes. For as long as I live I will be celibate; I will not engage in the sexual act. For as long as I live I will subsist only on liquor and meat; I will not eat rice and sour gruel. I will not go beyond the Udena shrine to the east of Vesali, nor the Gotamaka shrine to the south, nor the Sattamba shrine to the west, nor the Bahuputta shrine to the north.’ It was because he undertook these seven ascetic rules that he reached the height of gain and fame in the Vajjian villages.

12. ‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto yena acelo kaḷāramaṭṭako tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā acelaṃ kaḷāramaṭṭakaṃ pañhaṃ apucchi. Tassa acelo kaḷāramaṭṭako pañhaṃ puṭṭho na sampāyāsi. Asampāyanto kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātvākāsi. Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhattassa licchaviputtassa etadahosi – ‘sādhurūpaṃ vata bho arahantaṃ samaṇaṃ āsādimhase [asādiyimhase (syā.)]. Mā vata no ahosi dīgharattaṃ ahitāya dukkhāyā’ti.

12. "Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son went to the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka and approached him; having approached, he asked the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka a question. But when questioned, the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka could not explain. Being unable to explain, he displayed anger, aversion, and discontent. Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son had this thought: ‘Alas, good sirs, we have insulted a worthy ascetic, an arahant! May this not be for our harm and suffering for a long time!’"

13. ‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhaggava, sunakkhattaṃ licchaviputtaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘tvampi nāma, moghapurisa, samaṇo sakyaputtiyo paṭijānissasī’ti! ‘Kiṃ pana maṃ, bhante, bhagavā evamāha – tvampi nāma, moghapurisa, samaṇo sakyaputtiyo paṭijānissasī’ti? ‘Nanu tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, acelaṃ kaḷāramaṭṭakaṃ upasaṅkamitvā pañhaṃ apucchi. Tassa te acelo kaḷāramaṭṭako pañhaṃ puṭṭho na sampāyāsi. Asampāyanto kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātvākāsi. Tassa te etadahosi – ‘‘sādhurūpaṃ vata, bho, arahantaṃ samaṇaṃ āsādimhase. Mā vata no ahosi dīgharattaṃ ahitāya dukkhāyā’ti. ‘Evaṃ, bhante. Kiṃ pana, bhante, bhagavā arahattassa maccharāyatī’ti? ‘Na kho ahaṃ, moghapurisa, arahattassa maccharāyāmi, api ca tuyhevetaṃ pāpakaṃ diṭṭhigataṃ uppannaṃ, taṃ pajaha. Mā te ahosi dīgharattaṃ ahitāya dukkhāya. Yaṃ kho panetaṃ, sunakkhatta, maññasi acelaṃ kaḷāramaṭṭakaṃ – sādhurūpo ayaṃ [arahaṃ (syā.)] samaṇoti, so nacirasseva parihito sānucāriko vicaranto odanakummāsaṃ bhuñjamāno sabbāneva vesāliyāni cetiyāni samatikkamitvā yasā nihīno [yasānikiṇṇo (ka.)] kālaṃ karissatī’ti.

13. Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son approached me, and after paying homage to me, he sat down to one side. To Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son, who was sitting to one side, I said: ‘You too, you worthless man, do you claim to be a Sakyan ascetic?’ ‘But why, venerable sir, does the Blessed One say this to me: "You too, you worthless man, do you claim to be a Sakyan ascetic?"’ ‘Didn’t you, Sunakkhatta, go to the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka and ask him a question? When questioned, he could not explain. Being unable to explain, he displayed anger, aversion, and discontent. Then you thought: "Alas, good sirs, we have insulted a worthy ascetic, an arahant! May this not be for our harm and suffering for a long time!"’ ‘Yes, venerable sir.’ ‘But, venerable sir, is the Blessed One jealous of arahantship?’ ‘I am not jealous of arahantship, you worthless man. Rather, this evil view has arisen in you—abandon it! May it not be for your harm and suffering for a long time. As for that naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka whom you consider a worthy ascetic, he will soon abandon his training, wander with followers, eating rice and gruel, having gone beyond all the shrines of Vesali, and die disgraced.’

‘‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, acelo kaḷāramaṭṭako nacirasseva parihito sānucāriko vicaranto odanakummāsaṃ bhuñjamāno sabbāneva vesāliyāni cetiyāni samatikkamitvā yasā nihīno kālamakāsi.

Then, Bhaggava, not long after, the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka, having abandoned his training, wandering with a following, eating rice and gruel, having gone beyond all the shrines of Vesālī, died disgraced.

14. ‘‘Assosi kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto – ‘acelo kira kaḷāramaṭṭako parihito sānucāriko vicaranto odanakummāsaṃ bhuñjamāno sabbāneva vesāliyāni cetiyāni samatikkamitvā yasā nihīno kālaṅkato’ti. Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhaggava, sunakkhattaṃ licchaviputtaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sunakkhatta, yatheva te ahaṃ acelaṃ kaḷāramaṭṭakaṃ ārabbha byākāsiṃ, tatheva taṃ vipākaṃ, aññathā vā’ti? ‘Yatheva me, bhante, bhagavā acelaṃ kaḷāramaṭṭakaṃ ārabbha byākāsi, tatheva taṃ vipākaṃ, no aññathā’ti. ‘Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sunakkhatta, yadi evaṃ sante kataṃ vā hoti uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ akataṃ vā’ti? ‘Addhā kho, bhante, evaṃ sante kataṃ hoti uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ, no akata’nti. ‘Evampi kho maṃ tvaṃ, moghapurisa, uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karontaṃ evaṃ vadesi – na hi pana me, bhante, bhagavā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karotī’’ti. Passa, moghapurisa, yāvañca te idaṃ aparaddha’nti. ‘‘Eva’mpi kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto mayā vuccamāno apakkameva imasmā dhammavinayā, yathā taṃ āpāyiko nerayiko.

14. ‘‘Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son heard: ‘It seems the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka, having abandoned his training, wandering with a following and eating rice and gruel, having gone beyond all the shrines of Vesālī, died disgraced.’ Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son approached me; and after paying homage to me, he sat down to one side. To Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son, who was sitting to one side, I said: ‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta? As I declared to you concerning the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka, has it turned out just so, or otherwise?’ ‘As the Blessed One declared to me concerning the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka, it has turned out just so, not otherwise.’ ‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If this is so, then has a superhuman marvel and feat of psychic power been done or not?’ ‘Surely, venerable sir, if this is so, then a superhuman marvel and feat of psychic power has been done, not undone.’ ‘Even though I perform a superhuman marvel and feat of psychic power, worthless man, you say: "But, venerable sir, the Blessed One does not perform a superhuman marvel and feat of psychic power for me!" See, worthless man, how greatly you have erred!’ Thus, Bhaggava, though being spoken to thus by me, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi son departed from this Dhamma and Discipline, just as one destined for the lower realms, for hell.

## Acelapāthikaputtavatthu

### The Story of the Naked Ascetic Pāthikaputta

15. ‘‘Ekamidāhaṃ, bhaggava, samayaṃ tattheva vesāliyaṃ viharāmi mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. Tena kho pana samayena acelo pāthikaputto [pāṭikaputto (sī. syā. pī.)] vesāliyaṃ paṭivasati lābhaggappatto ceva yasaggappatto ca vajjigāme. So vesāliyaṃ parisati evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsati – ‘samaṇopi gotamo ñāṇavādo, ahampi ñāṇavādo. Ñāṇavādo kho pana ñāṇavādena arahati uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ dassetuṃ. Samaṇo gotamo upaḍḍhapathaṃ āgaccheyya, ahampi upaḍḍhapathaṃ gaccheyyaṃ. Te tattha ubhopi uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ kareyyāma. Ekaṃ ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissati, dvāhaṃ karissāmi. Dve ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyāni karissati, cattārāhaṃ karissāmi. Cattāri ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyāni karissati, aṭṭhāhaṃ karissāmi. Iti yāvatakaṃ yāvatakaṃ samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissati, taddiguṇaṃ taddiguṇāhaṃ karissāmī’ti.

15. ‘Bhaggava, at one time I was staying right there in Vesālī, in the Great Wood, in the peaked-roof hall. Now at that time the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta was living in Vesālī, having attained gain and fame among the Vajjis. He addressed the assembly in Vesālī thus: “The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of knowledge, and I too am a proponent of knowledge. As proponents of knowledge, we should each display a superhuman miracle. Let the ascetic Gotama come halfway, and I will go halfway. There both of us will perform a superhuman miracle. If the ascetic Gotama performs one superhuman miracle, I will perform two. If he performs two, I will perform four. If he performs four, I will perform eight. Whatever superhuman miracles the ascetic Gotama performs, I will perform double that number.”’

16. ‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto maṃ etadavoca – ‘acelo, bhante, pāthikaputto vesāliyaṃ paṭivasati lābhaggappatto ceva yasaggappatto ca vajjigāme. So vesāliyaṃ parisati evaṃ vācaṃ bhāsati – samaṇopi gotamo ñāṇavādo, ahampi ñāṇavādo. Ñāṇavādo kho pana ñāṇavādena arahati uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ dassetuṃ. Samaṇo gotamo upaḍḍhapathaṃ āgaccheyya, ahampi upaḍḍhapathaṃ gaccheyyaṃ. Te tattha ubhopi uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ kareyyāma. Ekaṃ ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissati, dvāhaṃ karissāmi. Dve ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyāni karissati, cattārāhaṃ karissāmi. Cattāri ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyāni karissati, aṭṭhāhaṃ karissāmi. Iti yāvatakaṃ yāvatakaṃ samaṇo gotamo uttari manussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissati, taddiguṇaṃ taddiguṇāhaṃ karissāmī’’ti.

16. Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi approached me; having approached, he paid homage to me and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi said this to me: "Venerable sir, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is dwelling in Vesālī, having attained gain and fame among the Vajjis. He addresses the assembly in Vesālī thus: 'The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of knowledge, and I too am a proponent of knowledge. As proponents of knowledge, we should each display a superhuman miracle. Let the ascetic Gotama come halfway, and I will go halfway. There both of us will perform a superhuman miracle. If the ascetic Gotama performs one superhuman miracle, I will perform two. If he performs two, I will perform four. If he performs four, I will perform eight. Whatever superhuman miracles the ascetic Gotama performs, I will perform double that number.'"

‘‘Evaṃ vutte, ahaṃ, bhaggava, sunakkhattaṃ licchaviputtaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘abhabbo kho, sunakkhatta, acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti.

When this was said, I, Bhaggava, said to Sunakkhatta the Licchavi: "Sunakkhatta, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. If it were to happen that he thinks, 'I will come into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view,' his head would split apart."

17. ‘Rakkhatetaṃ, bhante, bhagavā vācaṃ, rakkhatetaṃ sugato vāca’nti. ‘Kiṃ pana maṃ tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, evaṃ vadesi – rakkhatetaṃ, bhante, bhagavā vācaṃ, rakkhatetaṃ sugato vāca’nti? ‘Bhagavatā cassa, bhante, esā vācā ekaṃsena odhāritā [ovāditā (ka.)] – abhabbo acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyāti. Acelo ca, bhante, pāthikaputto virūparūpena bhagavato sammukhībhāvaṃ āgaccheyya, tadassa bhagavato musā’ti.

17. "Venerable sir, the Blessed One should guard this statement, the Well-Gone One should guard this statement." "Why do you say this to me, Sunakkhatta: 'Venerable sir, the Blessed One should guard this statement, the Well-Gone One should guard this statement'?" "Because, venerable sir, this statement has been definitively uttered by the Blessed One: 'The naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. If it were to happen that he thinks, "I will come into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view," his head would split apart.' And, venerable sir, if the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta were to come into the Blessed One's presence in an altered form, that would be a lie for the Blessed One."

18. ‘Api nu, sunakkhatta, tathāgato taṃ vācaṃ bhāseyya yā sā vācā dvayagāminī’ti? ‘Kiṃ pana, bhante, bhagavatā acelo pāthikaputto cetasā ceto paricca vidito – abhabbo acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti?

18. "Sunakkhatta, would the Tathāgata utter speech that is untrue?" "But, venerable sir, has the Blessed One known the mind of the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta, comprehending it with his own mind, thus: 'The naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. And even if it were to occur to him, "Without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama," his head would split apart'?"

‘Udāhu, devatā bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ – abhabbo, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā bhagavato sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti?

"Or did the deities inform the Blessed One of this matter: ‘Venerable sir, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into the presence of the Blessed One without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. If it were to occur to him thus: "I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view," his head would split apart’?"

19. ‘Cetasā ceto paricca vidito ceva me, sunakkhatta, acelo pāthikaputto abhabbo acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti.

19. "Having encompassed his mind with my mind, Sunakkhatta, I understood: ‘The naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. And even if it were to occur to him thus: "I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view," his head would split apart.’"

‘Devatāpi me etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ – abhabbo, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā bhagavato sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti.

"The deities also informed me of this matter: ‘Venerable sir, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into the presence of the Blessed One without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. If it were to occur to him thus: “I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view,” his head would split apart.’"

‘Ajitopi nāma licchavīnaṃ senāpati adhunā kālaṅkato tāvatiṃsakāyaṃ upapanno. Sopi maṃ upasaṅkamitvā evamārocesi – alajjī, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto; musāvādī, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto. Mampi, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto byākāsi vajjigāme – ajito licchavīnaṃ senāpati mahānirayaṃ upapannoti. Na kho panāhaṃ, bhante, mahānirayaṃ upapanno; tāvatiṃsakāyamhi upapanno. Alajjī, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto; musāvādī, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto; abhabbo ca, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā bhagavato sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti.

"And Ajita, the general of the Licchavis, who recently died, was reborn among the Tāvatiṃsa devas. He too approached me and said: ‘Venerable sir, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is shameless; he is a liar. Venerable sir, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta also declared about me in the Vajjian village: “Ajita, the general of the Licchavis, has been reborn in the great hell.” But, venerable sir, I was not reborn in the great hell; I was reborn among the Tāvatiṃsa devas. Venerable sir, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is shameless; he is a liar. And, venerable sir, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into the presence of the Blessed One without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. And even if it were to occur to him thus: “I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view,” even his head would split apart.’"

‘Iti kho, sunakkhatta, cetasā ceto paricca vidito ceva me acelo pāthikaputto abhabbo acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyāti. Devatāpi me etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ – abhabbo, bhante, acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā bhagavato sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti.

"Thus, Sunakkhatta, having comprehended his mind with my own mind, I understood that the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable—without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view—of coming into my presence. And even if it were to occur to him thus: ‘Without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama,’ even his head would split apart. The deities also informed me of this matter: ‘Venerable sir, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable—without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view—of coming into the Blessed One’s presence. And even if it were to occur to him thus: “Without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama,” even his head would split apart.’"

‘So kho panāhaṃ, sunakkhatta, vesāliyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātappaṭikkanto yena acelassa pāthikaputtassa ārāmo tenupasaṅkamissāmi divāvihārāya. Yassadāni tvaṃ, sunakkhatta, icchasi, tassa ārocehī’ti.

"Then, Sunakkhatta, after wandering for alms in Vesālī and having returned from the alms round after the meal, I will go to the park of the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta for the day's sojourn. You may inform whomever you wish."

## Iddhipāṭihāriyakathā

### The Discourse on the Miracle of Psychic Power

20. ‘‘Atha khvāhaṃ [atha kho svāhaṃ (syā.)], bhaggava, pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya vesāliṃ piṇḍāya pāvisiṃ. Vesāliyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātappaṭikkanto yena acelassa pāthikaputtassa ārāmo tenupasaṅkamiṃ divāvihārāya. Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto taramānarūpo vesāliṃ pavisitvā yena abhiññātā abhiññātā licchavī tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā abhiññāte abhiññāte licchavī etadavoca – ‘esāvuso, bhagavā vesāliyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātappaṭikkanto yena acelassa pāthikaputtassa ārāmo tenupasaṅkami divāvihārāya. Abhikkamathāyasmanto abhikkamathāyasmanto, sādhurūpānaṃ samaṇānaṃ uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ bhavissatī’ti. Atha kho, bhaggava, abhiññātānaṃ abhiññātānaṃ licchavīnaṃ etadahosi – ‘sādhurūpānaṃ kira, bho, samaṇānaṃ uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ bhavissati; handa vata, bho, gacchāmā’ti. Yena ca abhiññātā abhiññātā brāhmaṇamahāsālā gahapatinecayikā nānātitthiyā [nānātitthiya (syā.)] samaṇabrāhmaṇā tenupasaṅkami. Upasaṅkamitvā abhiññāte abhiññāte nānātitthiye [nānātitthiya (syā.)] samaṇabrāhmaṇe etadavoca – ‘esāvuso, bhagavā vesāliyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātappaṭikkanto yena acelassa pāthikaputtassa ārāmo tenupasaṅkami divāvihārāya. Abhikkamathāyasmanto abhikkamathāyasmanto, sādhurūpānaṃ samaṇānaṃ uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ bhavissatī’ti. Atha kho, bhaggava, abhiññātānaṃ abhiññātānaṃ nānātitthiyānaṃ samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṃ etadahosi – ‘sādhurūpānaṃ kira, bho, samaṇānaṃ uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ bhavissati; handa vata, bho, gacchāmā’ti.

20. Then, Bhaggava, in the morning, having dressed, and taking my bowl and robe, I entered Vesālī for alms. After wandering for alms in Vesālī and returning from the almsround, I went to the grove of the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta for the day’s abiding. Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi, in a hurry, entered Vesālī and approached the well-known Licchavis. Having approached them, he said to the well-known Licchavis: ‘Friends, the Blessed One, after wandering for alms in Vesālī and returning from the almsround, has gone to the grove of the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta for the day’s abiding. Come forth, venerable ones, come forth! There will be a superhuman miracle of psychic power on the part of worthy ascetics.’ Then, Bhaggava, the well-known Licchavis thought: ‘Indeed, friends, a superhuman miracle of psychic power will be on the part of worthy ascetics. Come, let us go!’ They also approached the well-known prominent brahmins, wealthy householders, and ascetics and brahmins of other sects. Having approached them, Sunakkhatta said to the well-known ascetics and brahmins of other sects: ‘Friends, the Blessed One, after wandering for alms in Vesālī and returning from the almsround, has gone to the grove of the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta for the day’s abiding. Come forth, venerable ones, come forth! There will be a superhuman miracle of psychic power on the part of worthy ascetics.’ Then, Bhaggava, the well-known ascetics and brahmins of other sects thought: ‘Indeed, friends, a superhuman miracle of psychic power will be on the part of worthy ascetics. Come, let us go!’

‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, abhiññātā abhiññātā licchavī, abhiññātā abhiññātā ca brāhmaṇamahāsālā gahapatinecayikā nānātitthiyā samaṇabrāhmaṇā yena acelassa pāthikaputtassa ārāmo tenupasaṅkamiṃsu. Sā esā, bhaggava, parisā mahā hoti [parisā hoti (sī. syā. pī.)] anekasatā anekasahassā.

Then, Bhaggava, the well-known Licchavis, and the well-known prominent brahmins, wealthy householders, and ascetics and brahmins of other sects all approached the grove of the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta. That assembly, Bhaggava, was large, numbering many hundreds and thousands.

21. ‘‘Assosi kho, bhaggava, acelo pāthikaputto – ‘abhikkantā kira abhiññātā abhiññātā licchavī, abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā ca brāhmaṇamahāsālā gahapatinecayikā nānātitthiyā samaṇabrāhmaṇā. Samaṇopi gotamo mayhaṃ ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno’ti. Sutvānassa bhayaṃ chambhitattaṃ lomahaṃso udapādi. Atha kho, bhaggava, acelo pāthikaputto bhīto saṃviggo lomahaṭṭhajāto yena tindukakhāṇuparibbājakārāmo tenupasaṅkami.

21. 21. Then, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta heard: ‘Indeed, the well-known Licchavis have arrived, and so have the well-known prominent brahmins, wealthy householders, and ascetics and brahmins of other sects. The ascetic Gotama is also seated in my grove for the day’s abiding.’ Upon hearing this, fear and consternation arose in him, and his hair stood on end. Then, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta, frightened, agitated, and with his hair standing on end, went to the grove of the wanderers at the Tinduka tree stump.

‘‘Assosi kho, bhaggava, sā parisā – ‘acelo kira pāthikaputto bhīto saṃviggo lomahaṭṭhajāto yena tindukakhāṇuparibbājakārāmo tenupasaṅkanto’ti [tenupasaṅkamanto (sī. pī. ka.)]. Atha kho, bhaggava, sā parisā aññataraṃ purisaṃ āmantesi –

Then, Bhaggava, that assembly heard: ‘It seems the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta, frightened, agitated, his hair standing on end, has approached the grove of the wanderers at the Tinduka tree stump.’ Then, Bhaggava, that assembly addressed a certain man:

‘Ehi tvaṃ, bho purisa, yena tindukakhāṇuparibbājakārāmo, yena acelo pāthikaputto tenupasaṅkama. Upasaṅkamitvā acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ evaṃ vadehi – abhikkamāvuso, pāthikaputta, abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā licchavī, abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā ca brāhmaṇamahāsālā gahapatinecayikā nānātitthiyā samaṇabrāhmaṇā, samaṇopi gotamo āyasmato ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno; bhāsitā kho pana te esā, āvuso pāthikaputta, vesāliyaṃ parisati vācā samaṇopi gotamo ñāṇavādo, ahampi ñāṇavādo. Ñāṇavādo kho pana ñāṇavādena arahati uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ dassetuṃ. Samaṇo gotamo upaḍḍhapathaṃ āgaccheyya ahampi upaḍḍhapathaṃ gaccheyyaṃ. Te tattha ubhopi uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ kareyyāma. Ekaṃ ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissati, dvāhaṃ karissāmi. Dve ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyāni karissati, cattārāhaṃ karissāmi. Cattāri ce samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyāni karissati, aṭṭhāhaṃ karissāmi. Iti yāvatakaṃ yāvatakaṃ samaṇo gotamo uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karissati, taddiguṇaṃ taddiguṇāhaṃ karissāmī’ti abhikkamasseva [abhikkamayeva (sī. syā. pī.)] kho; āvuso pāthikaputta, upaḍḍhapathaṃ. Sabbapaṭhamaṃyeva āgantvā samaṇo gotamo āyasmato ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno’ti.

‘Go, good man, to the park of the wanderers at the Tinduka tree stump, where the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is. Approach him and say: "Come forth, friend Pāṭikaputta. The well-known, prominent Licchavis have arrived, and so have the well-known, prominent brahmins, wealthy householders, and ascetics and brahmins of various sects. The ascetic Gotama is also seated in your park for his abiding for the day; and, friend Pāṭikaputta, you declared this statement in the assembly at Vesālī: ‘The ascetic Gotama claims knowledge, and I too claim knowledge. One who claims knowledge should demonstrate a superhuman feat of psychic power to another who claims knowledge. Let the ascetic Gotama come halfway, and I will go halfway. There, both of us can perform a superhuman feat of psychic power. If the ascetic Gotama performs one superhuman feat of psychic power, I will perform two. If the ascetic Gotama performs two superhuman feats of psychic power, I will perform four. If the ascetic Gotama performs four superhuman feats of psychic power, I will perform eight. Thus, whatever number of superhuman feats of psychic power the ascetic Gotama performs, I will perform double that number.’ Come forth indeed, friend Pāṭikaputta, and go halfway, for the ascetic Gotama has already arrived first and is seated in your park for his abiding for the day."’"

22. ‘‘Evaṃ, bhoti kho, bhaggava, so puriso tassā parisāya paṭissutvā yena tindukakhāṇuparibbājakārāmo, yena acelo pāthikaputto tenupasaṅkami. Upasaṅkamitvā acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ etadavoca – ‘abhikkamāvuso pāthikaputta, abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā licchavī, abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā ca brāhmaṇamahāsālā gahapatinecayikā nānātitthiyā samaṇabrāhmaṇā. Samaṇopi gotamo āyasmato ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno. Bhāsitā kho pana te esā, āvuso pāthikaputta, vesāliyaṃ parisati vācā – samaṇopi gotamo ñāṇavādo; ahampi ñāṇavādo. Ñāṇavādo kho pana ñāṇavādena arahati uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ dassetuṃ…pe… taddiguṇaṃ taddiguṇāhaṃ karissāmīti. Abhikkamasseva kho, āvuso pāthikaputta, upaḍḍhapathaṃ. Sabbapaṭhamaṃyeva āgantvā samaṇo gotamo āyasmato ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno’ti.

22. "So it was, Bhaggava. That man, having agreed with that assembly, went to the park of the wanderers at the Tinduka tree stump, where the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta was. Approaching the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta, he said: 'Come forth, friend Pāṭikaputta. The well-known, prominent Licchavis have arrived, and so have the well-known, prominent brahmins, wealthy householders, and ascetics and brahmins of various sects. The ascetic Gotama is also seated in your park for his abiding for the day; and, friend Pāṭikaputta, you declared this statement in the assembly at Vesālī: "The ascetic Gotama claims knowledge, and I too claim knowledge. One who claims knowledge should demonstrate a superhuman feat of psychic power to another who claims knowledge... I will perform double that number." Come forth indeed, friend Pāṭikaputta, and go halfway, for the ascetic Gotama has already arrived first and is seated in your park for his abiding for the day.'"

‘‘Evaṃ vutte, bhaggava, acelo pāthikaputto ‘āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvuso’ti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati [saṃsabbati (ka.)], na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātuṃ. Atha kho so, bhaggava, puriso acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ etadavoca – ‘kiṃ su nāma te, āvuso pāthikaputta, pāvaḷā su nāma te pīṭhakasmiṃ allīnā, pīṭhakaṃ su nāma te pāvaḷāsu allīnaṃ? Āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappasi, na sakkosi āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti. Evampi kho, bhaggava, vuccamāno acelo pāthikaputto ‘āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvuso’ti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātuṃ.

"When this was said, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta said, ‘I’m coming, friend, I’m coming, friend,’ yet he merely squirmed there, unable to even rise from his seat. Then that man said to the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta, ‘What’s this, friend Pāṭikaputta? Are your thighs stuck to the seat, or is the seat stuck to your thighs? You say, "I’m coming, friend, I’m coming, friend," yet you merely squirm there, unable to even rise from your seat.’ Even when spoken to thus, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta said, ‘I’m coming, friend, I’m coming, friend,’ yet he merely squirmed there, unable to even rise from his seat."

23. ‘‘Yadā kho so, bhaggava, puriso aññāsi – ‘parābhūtarūpo ayaṃ acelo pāthikaputto. Āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti. Atha taṃ parisaṃ āgantvā evamārocesi – ‘parābhūtarūpo, bho [parābhūtarūpo bho ayaṃ (syā. ka.), parābhūtarūpo (sī. pī.)], acelo pāthikaputto. Āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti. Evaṃ vutte, ahaṃ, bhaggava, taṃ parisaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘abhabbo kho, āvuso, acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ‘ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyya’nti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyāti.

23. "When that man realized, 'This naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is utterly defeated. He keeps saying, "I’m coming, friend, I’m coming, friend," yet he just squirmed there, unable to even rise from his seat,' he returned to the assembly and announced, 'Friends, the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is utterly defeated. He keeps saying, "I’m coming, friend, I’m coming, friend," yet he just squirmed there, unable to even rise from his seat.' When this was said, I addressed that assembly: 'Friend, the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without abandoning that speech, that thought, and relinquishing that view. If it were to occur to him, "Without abandoning that speech, that thought, and relinquishing that view, I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama," his head would split apart!'"

Paṭhamabhāṇavāro niṭṭhito.

Herein ends the First Recitation Section.

24. ‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, aññataro licchavimahāmatto uṭṭhāyāsanā taṃ parisaṃ etadavoca – ‘tena hi, bho, muhuttaṃ tāva āgametha, yāvāhaṃ gacchāmi [paccāgacchāmi (?)]. Appeva nāma ahampi sakkuṇeyyaṃ acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ imaṃ parisaṃ ānetu’nti.

24. "Then, Bhaggava, a certain Licchavi high minister rose from his seat and said to that assembly: 'Then, friends, wait just a moment, while I go. Perhaps even I might be able to bring the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta to this assembly.'"

‘‘Atha kho so, bhaggava, licchavimahāmatto yena tindukakhāṇuparibbājakārāmo, yena acelo pāthikaputto tenupasaṅkami. Upasaṅkamitvā acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ etadavoca – ‘abhikkamāvuso pāthikaputta, abhikkantaṃ te seyyo, abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā licchavī, abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā ca brāhmaṇamahāsālā gahapatinecayikā nānātitthiyā samaṇabrāhmaṇā. Samaṇopi gotamo āyasmato ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno. Bhāsitā kho pana te esā, āvuso pāthikaputta, vesāliyaṃ parisati vācā – samaṇopi gotamo ñāṇavādo…pe… taddiguṇaṃ taddiguṇāhaṃ karissāmīti. Abhikkamasseva kho, āvuso pāthikaputta, upaḍḍhapathaṃ. Sabbapaṭhamaṃyeva āgantvā samaṇo gotamo āyasmato ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno. Bhāsitā kho panesā, āvuso pāthikaputta, samaṇena gotamena parisati vācā – abhabbo kho acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyāti. Abhikkamāvuso pāthikaputta, abhikkamaneneva te jayaṃ karissāma, samaṇassa gotamassa parājaya’nti.

"Then, Bhaggava, that Licchavi high minister approached the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta at the wanderers' park at Tindukakhāṇa. Having approached, he said to the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta: 'Come forward, friend Pāṭikaputta, it would be better for you to come forward. The distinguished Licchavis have come forward, and the distinguished great Brahmins, generous householders, and ascetics and brahmins of various sects have come forward. The ascetic Gotama is seated in the venerable one's park for the day's abiding. And this statement was made by you, friend Pāṭikaputta, in the assembly at Vesālī: "The ascetic Gotama claims to have knowledge... I will do twice as much as that." Come forward, friend Pāṭikaputta, at least halfway. The ascetic Gotama has come first and is seated in the venerable one's park for the day's abiding. And this statement was made by the ascetic Gotama in the assembly: "The naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, and without relinquishing that view. If it were to occur to him, 'Without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, and without relinquishing that view, I will come into the presence of the ascetic Gotama,' his head would split apart!" Come forward, friend Pāṭikaputta, by your coming forward we will achieve your victory, and the defeat of the ascetic Gotama.'"

‘‘Evaṃ vutte, bhaggava, acelo pāthikaputto ‘āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvuso’ti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātuṃ. Atha kho so, bhaggava, licchavimahāmatto acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ etadavoca – ‘kiṃ su nāma te, āvuso pāthikaputta, pāvaḷā su nāma te pīṭhakasmiṃ allīnā, pīṭhakaṃ su nāma te pāvaḷāsu allīnaṃ? Āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappasi, na sakkosi āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti. Evampi kho, bhaggava, vuccamāno acelo pāthikaputto ‘āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvuso’ti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātuṃ.

"When this was said, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta said, 'I’m coming, friend, I’m coming,' but just kept squirming there, unable even to rise from his seat. Then, Bhaggava, that Licchavi high minister said to the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta: 'What's wrong, friend Pāthikaputta? Are your intestines stuck to the seat, or is the seat stuck to your intestines? You say, "I’m coming, friend, I’m coming," but you just keep squirming there, unable even to rise from your seat.' Even when spoken to thus, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta said, 'I’m coming, friend, I’m coming,' but just kept squirming there, unable even to rise from his seat."

25. ‘‘Yadā kho so, bhaggava, licchavimahāmatto aññāsi – ‘parābhūtarūpo ayaṃ acelo pāthikaputto āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti. Atha taṃ parisaṃ āgantvā evamārocesi – ‘parābhūtarūpo, bho [parābhūtarūpo (sī. pī.), parābhūtarūpo ayaṃ (syā.)], acelo pāthikaputto āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti. Evaṃ vutte, ahaṃ, bhaggava, taṃ parisaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘abhabbo kho, āvuso, acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyya. Sace pāyasmantānaṃ licchavīnaṃ evamassa – mayaṃ acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ varattāhi [yāhi varattāhi (syā. ka.)] bandhitvā goyugehi āviñcheyyāmāti [āviñjeyyāmāti (syā.), āvijjheyyāmāti (sī. pī.)], tā varattā chijjeyyuṃ pāthikaputto vā. Abhabbo pana acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti.

25. When, Bhaggava, that Licchavi high minister realized—'This naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is utterly defeated; saying "I’m coming, friend, I’m coming," he just kept squirming there, unable even to rise from his seat'—he went to that assembly and announced: 'Gentlemen, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is utterly defeated; saying "I’m coming, friend, I’m coming," he just kept squirming there, unable even to rise from his seat.' When this was said, I, Bhaggava, addressed that assembly: 'Friends, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without giving up that speech, without giving up that thought, without relinquishing that view. If he were to think, "I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without giving up that speech, without giving up that thought, without relinquishing that view," his head would split apart. If the venerable Licchavis were to think, "Let us bind the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta with ropes and drag him here with yokes of oxen," the ropes would break, or Pāthikaputta would. But the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without giving up that speech, without giving up that thought, without relinquishing that view. If he were to think, "I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without giving up that speech, without giving up that thought, without relinquishing that view," his head would split apart.'"

26. ‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, jāliyo dārupattikantevāsī uṭṭhāyāsanā taṃ parisaṃ etadavoca – ‘tena hi, bho, muhuttaṃ tāva āgametha, yāvāhaṃ gacchāmi; appeva nāma ahampi sakkuṇeyyaṃ acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ imaṃ parisaṃ ānetu’’nti.

26. Then, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the wooden-bowl disciple, rose from his seat and said to that assembly: 'Well then, sirs, wait here a moment while I go; perhaps I too may be able to bring the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta to this assembly.'

‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, jāliyo dārupattikantevāsī yena tindukakhāṇuparibbājakārāmo, yena acelo pāthikaputto tenupasaṅkami. Upasaṅkamitvā acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ etadavoca – ‘abhikkamāvuso pāthikaputta, abhikkantaṃ te seyyo. Abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā licchavī, abhikkantā abhiññātā abhiññātā ca brāhmaṇamahāsālā gahapatinecayikā nānātitthiyā samaṇabrāhmaṇā. Samaṇopi gotamo āyasmato ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno. Bhāsitā kho pana te esā, āvuso pāthikaputta, vesāliyaṃ parisati vācā – samaṇopi gotamo ñāṇavādo…pe… taddiguṇaṃ taddiguṇāhaṃ karissāmīti. Abhikkamasseva, kho āvuso pāthikaputta, upaḍḍhapathaṃ. Sabbapaṭhamaṃyeva āgantvā samaṇo gotamo āyasmato ārāme divāvihāraṃ nisinno. Bhāsitā kho panesā, āvuso pāthikaputta, samaṇena gotamena parisati vācā – abhabbo acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyya. Sace pāyasmantānaṃ licchavīnaṃ evamassa – mayaṃ acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ varattāhi bandhitvā goyugehi āviñcheyyāmāti. Tā varattā chijjeyyuṃ pāthikaputto vā. Abhabbo pana acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ āgaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyāti. Abhikkamāvuso pāthikaputta, abhikkamaneneva te jayaṃ karissāma, samaṇassa gotamassa parājaya’nti.

Then, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the wooden-bowl disciple, went to the Tinduka-khāṇu wanderers' park, to where the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta was. Approaching him, he said: 'Come forth, friend Pāthikaputta, it would be better for you to come forth. The distinguished and well-known Licchavis have come forth, and the distinguished and well-known great brahmin magnates, wealth-amassing householders, and various sectarian ascetics and brahmins have come forth. The ascetic Gotama is seated in the venerable one's park for the day's abiding. And this statement was uttered by you, friend Pāthikaputta, in the assembly at Vesālī: "The ascetic Gotama claims to have knowledge... I will perform double that feat." Come forth, friend Pāthikaputta, even halfway. The ascetic Gotama has come first and is seated in the venerable one's park for the day's abiding. And this statement was uttered by the ascetic Gotama, friend Pāthikaputta, in the assembly: "The naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without abandoning that statement, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. If he thinks, 'I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that statement, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view,' his head would split apart. If the venerable Licchavis think, 'Let us bind the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta with straps and drag him with yokes of oxen,' the straps would break, or Pāthikaputta would. But the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is incapable of coming into my presence without abandoning that statement, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view. If he thinks, 'I will come into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that statement, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view,' his head would split apart." Come forth, friend Pāthikaputta, by coming forth you will achieve victory; the ascetic Gotama will be defeated.'"

‘‘Evaṃ vutte, bhaggava, acelo pāthikaputto ‘āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvuso’ti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātuṃ. Atha kho, bhaggava, jāliyo dārupattikantevāsī acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ etadavoca – ‘kiṃ su nāma te, āvuso pāthikaputta, pāvaḷā su nāma te pīṭhakasmiṃ allīnā, pīṭhakaṃ su nāma te pāvaḷāsu allīnaṃ? Āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappasi, na sakkosi āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti. Evampi kho, bhaggava, vuccamāno acelo pāthikaputto ‘‘āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvuso’’ti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātunti.

When this was said, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta said, 'I'm coming, friend, I'm coming,' but he just writhed there, unable even to rise from his seat. Then, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the wooden-bowl disciple, said to the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta: 'What's the matter with you, friend Pāthikaputta? Are your legs stuck to your seat, or is your seat stuck to your legs? You say, "I'm coming, friend, I'm coming," but you just writhed there, unable even to rise from your seat.' Even when spoken to thus, Bhaggava, the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta said, 'I'm coming, friend, I'm coming,' but he just writhed there, unable even to rise from his seat.

27. ‘‘Yadā kho, bhaggava, jāliyo dārupattikantevāsī aññāsi – ‘parābhūtarūpo ayaṃ acelo pāthikaputto ‘āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti, atha naṃ etadavoca –

27. When, Bhaggava, Jāliya the wooden-bowl disciple understood, ‘This naked ascetic Pāthikaputta is defeated! Saying, "I am coming, friend, I am coming," he just writhes there, unable even to rise from his seat’—he then said to him:

‘Bhūtapubbaṃ, āvuso pāthikaputta, sīhassa migarañño etadahosi – yaṃnūnāhaṃ aññataraṃ vanasaṇḍaṃ nissāya āsayaṃ kappeyyaṃ. Tatrāsayaṃ kappetvā sāyanhasamayaṃ āsayā nikkhameyyaṃ, āsayā nikkhamitvā vijambheyyaṃ, vijambhitvā samantā catuddisā anuvilokeyyaṃ, samantā catuddisā anuviloketvā tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ nadeyyaṃ, tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ naditvā gocarāya pakkameyyaṃ. So varaṃ varaṃ migasaṃghe [migasaṃghaṃ (syā. ka.)] vadhitvā mudumaṃsāni mudumaṃsāni bhakkhayitvā tameva āsayaṃ ajjhupeyya’nti.

"Once upon a time, friend Pāthikaputta, the lion, the king of beasts, thought: ‘Suppose I were to establish a dwelling relying on a certain thicket. Having established a dwelling there, in the evening I would emerge from my dwelling. After emerging, I would yawn, survey the four directions all around, roar a lion's roar three times, and then set out for food. Having killed the best of the deer herds and eaten the tender meat, I would approach that same dwelling.’"

‘Atha kho, āvuso, so sīho migarājā aññataraṃ vanasaṇḍaṃ nissāya āsayaṃ kappesi. Tatrāsayaṃ kappetvā sāyanhasamayaṃ āsayā nikkhami, āsayā nikkhamitvā vijambhi, vijambhitvā samantā catuddisā anuvilokesi, samantā catuddisā anuviloketvā tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ nadi, tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ naditvā gocarāya pakkāmi. So varaṃ varaṃ migasaṅghe vadhitvā mudumaṃsāni mudumaṃsāni bhakkhayitvā tameva āsayaṃ ajjhupesi.

And then, friend, that lion, the king of beasts, relying on a certain thicket, established a dwelling. Having established a dwelling there, in the evening he emerged from his dwelling, yawned, surveyed the four directions all around, roared a lion's roar three times, and departed for food. Having killed the best of the deer herds and eaten tender meat, he approached that same dwelling.

28. ‘Tasseva kho, āvuso pāthikaputta, sīhassa migarañño vighāsasaṃvaḍḍho jarasiṅgālo [jarasigālo (sī. syā. pī.)] ditto ceva balavā ca. Atha kho, āvuso, tassa jarasiṅgālassa etadahosi – ko cāhaṃ, ko sīho migarājā. Yaṃnūnāhampi aññataraṃ vanasaṇḍaṃ nissāya āsayaṃ kappeyyaṃ. Tatrāsayaṃ kappetvā sāyanhasamayaṃ āsayā nikkhameyyaṃ, āsayā nikkhamitvā vijambheyyaṃ, vijambhitvā samantā catuddisā anuvilokeyyaṃ, samantā catuddisā anuviloketvā tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ nadeyyaṃ, tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ naditvā gocarāya pakkameyyaṃ. So varaṃ varaṃ migasaṅghe vadhitvā mudumaṃsāni mudumaṃsāni bhakkhayitvā tameva āsayaṃ ajjhupeyya’nti.

28. Now, friend Pāthikaputta, a jackal, grown old and fed on the leavings of that lion, the king of beasts, was elated and strong. Then that jackal thought: ‘What am I, and what is the lion, the king of beasts? Suppose I too were to establish a dwelling relying on a certain thicket. Having established a dwelling there, in the evening I would emerge from my dwelling. After emerging, I would yawn, survey the four directions all around, roar a lion’s roar three times, and then set out for food. Having killed the best of the herds of animals and eaten the tender meat, I would approach that same dwelling.’

‘Atha kho so, āvuso, jarasiṅgālo aññataraṃ vanasaṇḍaṃ nissāya āsayaṃ kappesi. Tatrāsayaṃ kappetvā sāyanhasamayaṃ āsayā nikkhami, āsayā nikkhamitvā vijambhi, vijambhitvā samantā catuddisā anuvilokesi, samantā catuddisā anuviloketvā tikkhattuṃ sīhanādaṃ nadissāmīti siṅgālakaṃyeva anadi bheraṇḍakaṃyeva [bhedaṇḍakaṃyeva (ka.)] anadi, ke ca chave siṅgāle, ke pana sīhanādeti [sīhanāde (?)].

And so, friend, that old jackal established a dwelling relying on a certain thicket. Having established a dwelling there, in the evening he emerged from his dwelling, yawned, surveyed the four directions all around, and thinking, 'I will roar a lion's roar three times,' he only howled like a jackal, indeed he only yelped wretchedly. 'What are we, mere jackals, and what is a lion's roar?'

‘Evameva kho tvaṃ, āvuso pāthikaputta, sugatāpadānesu jīvamāno sugatātirittāni bhuñjamāno tathāgate arahante sammāsambuddhe āsādetabbaṃ maññasi. Ke ca chave pāthikaputte, kā ca tathāgatānaṃ arahantānaṃ sammāsambuddhānaṃ āsādanā’ti.

Just so, friend Pāthikaputta, living on what was given for the Sugatas, eating what is left over from the Sugatas, you think you can insult the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One. But what are you, mere Pāthikaputta? And what is an insult to the Tathāgatas, the Arahants, the Perfectly Enlightened Ones?

29. ‘‘Yato kho, bhaggava, jāliyo dārupattikantevāsī iminā opammena neva asakkhi acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ tamhā āsanā cāvetuṃ. Atha naṃ etadavoca –

29. When, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the disciple of the wooden-bowl ascetic, could not, with this simile, make the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta rise from that seat, he then said to him:

‘Sīhoti attānaṃ samekkhiyāna,Amaññi kotthu migarājāhamasmi;Tatheva [tameva (syā.)] so siṅgālakaṃ anadi,Ke ca chave siṅgāle ke pana sīhanāde’ti.

‘Considering himself a lion,
the jackal thought, "I am the king of beasts!"
But all he uttered was a jackal’s cry—
What are mere jackals, and what is a lion’s roar?’

‘Evameva kho tvaṃ, āvuso pāthikaputta, sugatāpadānesu jīvamāno sugatātirittāni bhuñjamāno tathāgate arahante sammāsambuddhe āsādetabbaṃ maññasi. Ke ca chave pāthikaputte, kā ca tathāgatānaṃ arahantānaṃ sammāsambuddhānaṃ āsādanā’ti.

Just so, friend Pāthikaputta, living on the bounties of the Sugata and consuming what is left over from the Sugata, you imagine you can insult the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One. But what are you, mere Pāthikaputta? And what is an insult to the Tathāgatas, the Arahants, the Perfectly Enlightened Ones?

30. ‘‘Yato kho, bhaggava, jāliyo dārupattikantevāsī imināpi opammena neva asakkhi acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ tamhā āsanā cāvetuṃ. Atha naṃ etadavoca –

30. When, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the disciple of the wooden-bowl ascetic, was not able, even with this simile, to make the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta rise from that seat, he then said to him:

‘Aññaṃ anucaṅkamanaṃ, attānaṃ vighāse samekkhiya;Yāva attānaṃ na passati, kotthu tāva byagghoti maññati.

'Wandering after another,
And seeing himself in the refuse;
As long as he does not see himself,
The jackal still thinks, "I am a tiger."'

Tatheva so siṅgālakaṃ anadi;Ke ca chave siṅgāle ke pana sīhanāde’ti.

But all he uttered was a jackal’s cry—
What are mere jackals, and what is a lion’s roar?

‘Evameva kho tvaṃ, āvuso pāthikaputta, sugatāpadānesu jīvamāno sugatātirittāni bhuñjamāno tathāgate arahante sammāsambuddhe āsādetabbaṃ maññasi. Ke ca chave pāthikaputte, kā ca tathāgatānaṃ arahantānaṃ sammāsambuddhānaṃ āsādanā’ti.

Just so, friend Pāthikaputta, while living on the Sugata’s provisions and consuming the Sugata’s surplus, you imagine you can offend the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One. But what is this wretch, Pāthikaputta, and what is this offense to the Tathāgatas, the Arahants, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened Ones?

31. ‘‘Yato kho, bhaggava, jāliyo dārupattikantevāsī imināpi opammena neva asakkhi acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ tamhā āsanā cāvetuṃ. Atha naṃ etadavoca –

31.When, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the wooden-bowl ascetic’s disciple, could not, even with this simile, dislodge the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta from his seat, he then said this to him:

‘Bhutvāna bheke [bhiṅge (ka.)] khalamūsikāyo,Kaṭasīsu khittāni ca koṇapāni [kūṇapāni (syā.)];Mahāvane suññavane vivaḍḍho,Amaññi kotthu migarājāhamasmi.

‘Having eaten frogs and field mice, / And corpse-remains thrown in the charnel grounds, / Grown large in the great, desolate forest, / The jackal thought, ‘I am a king of beasts!’

Tatheva so siṅgālakaṃ anadi;Ke ca chave siṅgāle ke pana sīhanāde’ti.

Just so, he made the sound of a jackal. / What are contemptible jackals, and what are lion’s roars?

‘Evameva kho tvaṃ, āvuso pāthikaputta, sugatāpadānesu jīvamāno sugatātirittāni bhuñjamāno tathāgate arahante sammāsambuddhe āsādetabbaṃ maññasi. Ke ca chave pāthikaputte, kā ca tathāgatānaṃ arahantānaṃ sammāsambuddhānaṃ āsādanā’ti.

Just so, friend Pāthikaputta, while living on the Sugata’s provisions and consuming the Sugata’s surplus, you imagine you can offend the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One. But what is this wretch, Pāthikaputta, and what is this offense to the Tathāgatas, the Arahants, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened Ones?

32. ‘‘Yato kho, bhaggava, jāliyo dārupattikantevāsī imināpi opammena neva asakkhi acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ tamhā āsanā cāvetuṃ. Atha taṃ parisaṃ āgantvā evamārocesi – ‘parābhūtarūpo, bho, acelo pāthikaputto āyāmi āvuso, āyāmi āvusoti vatvā tattheva saṃsappati, na sakkoti āsanāpi vuṭṭhātu’nti.

32.When, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the wooden-bowl ascetic’s disciple, could not, even with this simile, dislodge the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta from his seat, he went to the assembly and announced: ‘The naked ascetic Pāthikaputta, friends, is overcome. Saying, “I am coming, friend, I am coming, friend,” he just crawls there, unable even to rise from his seat.’

33. ‘‘Evaṃ vutte, ahaṃ, bhaggava, taṃ parisaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘abhabbo kho, āvuso, acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyya. Sacepāyasmantānaṃ licchavīnaṃ evamassa – mayaṃ acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ varattāhi bandhitvā nāgehi [goyugehi (sabbattha) aṭṭhakathā passitabbā] āviñcheyyāmāti. Tā varattā chijjeyyuṃ pāthikaputto vā. Abhabbo pana acelo pāthikaputto taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā mama sammukhībhāvaṃ āgantuṃ. Sacepissa evamassa – ahaṃ taṃ vācaṃ appahāya taṃ cittaṃ appahāya taṃ diṭṭhiṃ appaṭinissajjitvā samaṇassa gotamassa sammukhībhāvaṃ gaccheyyanti, muddhāpi tassa vipateyyā’ti.

33.When this was said, Bhaggava, I addressed that assembly thus: ‘It is impossible, friends, for the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta, without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, to come into my presence. If it were to occur to him, "I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that speech, that thought, or that view," his head would split apart. If the venerable Licchavis were to think, "Let us bind the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta with ropes and drag him with elephants," either the ropes would break or Pāthikaputta himself would be the one to break. But it is impossible for the naked ascetic Pāthikaputta, without abandoning that speech, without abandoning that thought, without relinquishing that view, to come into my presence. If it were to occur to him, "I will go into the presence of the ascetic Gotama without abandoning that speech, that thought, or that view," his head would split apart.’

34. ‘‘Atha khvāhaṃ, bhaggava, taṃ parisaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassesiṃ samādapesiṃ samuttejesiṃ sampahaṃsesiṃ, taṃ parisaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṃsetvā mahābandhanā mokkhaṃ karitvā caturāsītipāṇasahassāni mahāviduggā uddharitvā tejodhātuṃ samāpajjitvā sattatālaṃ vehāsaṃ abbhuggantvā aññaṃ sattatālampi acciṃ [aggiṃ (syā.)] abhinimminitvā pajjalitvā dhūmāyitvā [dhūpāyitvā (sī. pī.)] mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ paccuṭṭhāsiṃ.

34.Then, Bhaggava, I instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened that assembly with a Dhamma talk. Having instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened that assembly with a Dhamma talk, having freed them from the great bondage, and having uplifted eighty-four thousand beings from great peril, I attained the fire element. Rising seven palm-trees high into the air, and having created another flame seven palm-trees high, blazing and smoking, I reappeared in the great forest in the peaked hall.

35. ‘‘Atha kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto yenāhaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā maṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho ahaṃ, bhaggava, sunakkhattaṃ licchaviputtaṃ etadavocaṃ – ‘taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sunakkhatta, yatheva te ahaṃ acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ ārabbha byākāsiṃ, tatheva taṃ vipākaṃ aññathā vā’ti? ‘Yatheva me, bhante, bhagavā acelaṃ pāthikaputtaṃ ārabbha byākāsi, tatheva taṃ vipākaṃ, no aññathā’ti.

35.Then, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta the Licchavi approached me; having approached, he paid homage to me and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, I said to Sunakkhatta the Licchavi: ‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Is the result just as I described concerning the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta, or is it otherwise?’ ‘Just as the Blessed One described concerning the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta, venerable sir, so it is, not otherwise.’

‘Taṃ kiṃ maññasi, sunakkhatta, yadi evaṃ sante kataṃ vā hoti uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ, akataṃ vā’ti? ‘Addhā kho, bhante, evaṃ sante kataṃ hoti uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ, no akata’nti. ‘Evampi kho maṃ tvaṃ, moghapurisa, uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karontaṃ evaṃ vadesi – na hi pana me, bhante, bhagavā uttarimanussadhammā iddhipāṭihāriyaṃ karotīti. Passa, moghapurisa, yāvañca te idaṃ aparaddhaṃ’ti.

‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If that is the case, has a superhuman phenomenon, a miracle of psychic power, been done or not?’ ‘Surely, venerable sir, if that is the case, a superhuman phenomenon, a miracle of psychic power, has been done, not undone.’ ‘Even so, foolish man, while I am performing a superhuman phenomenon, a miracle of psychic power, you say: “But, venerable sir, the Blessed One does not perform a superhuman phenomenon, a miracle of psychic power.” See, foolish man, how much you have wronged!’

‘‘Evampi kho, bhaggava, sunakkhatto licchaviputto mayā vuccamāno apakkameva imasmā dhammavinayā, yathā taṃ āpāyiko nerayiko.

Thus, Bhaggava, though admonished by me in this way, Sunakkhatta, the Licchavi’s son, departed from this Dhamma and Discipline, as if bound for the lower world, for hell.

## Aggaññapaññattikathā

### The Account of Origins

36. ‘‘Aggaññañcāhaṃ, bhaggava, pajānāmi. Tañca pajānāmi [‘‘tañcapajānāmī’’ti idaṃ syāpotthakenatthi], tato ca uttaritaraṃ pajānāmi, tañca pajānaṃ [pajānanaṃ (syā. ka.) aṭṭhakathāsaṃvaṇṇanā passitabbā] na parāmasāmi, aparāmasato ca me paccattaññeva nibbuti viditā, yadabhijānaṃ tathāgato no anayaṃ āpajjati.

36.“Bhaggava, I know the primal origin. I know that, and I know what is beyond that. Knowing that, I do not grasp at it. Not grasping, I have realized extinguishment for myself. Knowing this, the Tathāgata does not incur harm.

37. ‘‘Santi, bhaggava, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā issarakuttaṃ brahmakuttaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapenti. Tyāhaṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadāmi – ‘saccaṃ kira tumhe āyasmanto issarakuttaṃ brahmakuttaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? Te ca me evaṃ puṭṭhā, ‘āmo’ti [āmāti (syā.)] paṭijānanti. Tyāhaṃ evaṃ vadāmi – ‘kathaṃvihitakaṃ pana [kathaṃ vihitakaṃno pana (ka.)] tumhe āyasmanto issarakuttaṃ brahmakuttaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? Te mayā puṭṭhā na sampāyanti, asampāyantā mamaññeva paṭipucchanti. Tesāhaṃ puṭṭho byākaromi –

37.“There are, Bhaggava, some ascetics and brahmins who proclaim a doctrine of a lord, a doctrine of Brahmā, a doctrine of a master, or a primal doctrine. I approach them and ask: ‘Is it true, venerable sirs, that you proclaim a doctrine of a lord, a doctrine of Brahmā, a doctrine of a master, or a primal doctrine?’ When asked, they admit it is so. I then ask: ‘But how, venerable sirs, do you proclaim this doctrine of a lord, a doctrine of Brahmā, a doctrine of a master, or a primal doctrine?’ When questioned by me, they are unable to explain, and being unable to explain, they in turn question me. When questioned, I explain:

38. ‘Hoti kho so, āvuso, samayo yaṃ kadāci karahaci dīghassa addhuno accayena ayaṃ loko saṃvaṭṭati. Saṃvaṭṭamāne loke yebhuyyena sattā ābhassarasaṃvattanikā honti. Te tattha honti manomayā pītibhakkhā sayaṃpabhā antalikkhacarā subhaṭṭhāyino ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭhanti.

38.‘There comes a time, venerable sirs, when after a long, long period this world contracts. As the world contracts, most beings are reborn in the Ābhassara realm. There they are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, moving through the sky, abiding in glory. They remain there for a very long time.

‘Hoti kho so, āvuso, samayo yaṃ kadāci karahaci dīghassa addhuno accayena ayaṃ loko vivaṭṭati. Vivaṭṭamāne loke suññaṃ brahmavimānaṃ pātubhavati. Atha kho [atha (sī. syā. pī.)] aññataro satto āyukkhayā vā puññakkhayā vā ābhassarakāyā cavitvā suññaṃ brahmavimānaṃ upapajjati. So tattha hoti manomayo pītibhakkho sayaṃpabho antalikkhacaro subhaṭṭhāyī, ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭhati.

‘There comes a time, venerable sir, when after a long period, this world expands. As the world expands, an empty Brahma realm appears. Then a certain being, due to the exhaustion of lifespan or merit, passes away from the Ābhassara realm and is reborn in that empty Brahma realm. There, he is mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, moving through the sky, abiding in glory, and he remains there for a very long time.

‘Tassa tattha ekakassa dīgharattaṃ nivusitattā anabhirati paritassanā uppajjati – aho vata aññepi sattā itthattaṃ āgaccheyyunti. Atha aññepi sattā āyukkhayā vā puññakkhayā vā ābhassarakāyā cavitvā brahmavimānaṃ upapajjanti tassa sattassa sahabyataṃ. Tepi tattha honti manomayā pītibhakkhā sayaṃpabhā antalikkhacarā subhaṭṭhāyino, ciraṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ tiṭṭhanti.

“Having dwelt there alone for a long time, discontent and anxiety arise in him: ‘Oh, that other beings might come to this state!’ Then other beings, due to the exhaustion of lifespan or merit, pass away from the Ābhassara realm and are reborn in the Brahma realm as his companions. They too are there, mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, moving through the sky, abiding in glory, for a very long time.

39. ‘Tatrāvuso, yo so satto paṭhamaṃ upapanno, tassa evaṃ hoti – ahamasmi brahmā mahābrahmā abhibhū anabhibhūto aññadatthudaso vasavattī issaro kattā nimmātā seṭṭho sajitā [sañjitā (sī. pī.), sajjitā (syā. kaṃ.)] vasī pitā bhūtabhabyānaṃ, mayā ime sattā nimmitā. Taṃ kissa hetu? Mamañhi pubbe etadahosi – aho vata aññepi sattā itthattaṃ āgaccheyyunti; iti mama ca manopaṇidhi. Ime ca sattā itthattaṃ āgatāti.

39.‘Now, venerable sir, that being who was reborn there first thinks: ‘I am Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the All-Seeing, the All-Powerful, the Lord, the Maker, the Creator, the Best, the Ordainer, the Controller, the Father of those who have been and will be. These beings were created by me.’ What is the reason for that? Formerly I thought: ‘Oh, that other beings might come to this state!’ Thus, this was my mental aspiration. And now these beings have come to this state.’

‘Yepi te sattā pacchā upapannā, tesampi evaṃ hoti – ayaṃ kho bhavaṃ brahmā mahābrahmā abhibhū anabhibhūto aññadatthudaso vasavattī issaro kattā nimmātā seṭṭho sajitā vasī pitā bhūtabhabyānaṃ; iminā mayaṃ bhotā brahmunā nimmitā. Taṃ kissa hetu? Imañhi mayaṃ addasāma idha paṭhamaṃ upapannaṃ; mayaṃ panāmha pacchā upapannāti.

“And those beings who were reborn later also think: ‘This, surely, is Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the All-Seeing, the All-Powerful, the Lord, the Maker, the Creator, the Best, the Ordainer, the Controller, the Father of those who have been and will be. By this Brahmā were we created. What is the reason for that? We saw him appear here first; we appeared afterward.’

40. ‘Tatrāvuso, yo so satto paṭhamaṃ upapanno, so dīghāyukataro ca hoti vaṇṇavantataro ca mahesakkhataro ca. Ye pana te sattā pacchā upapannā, te appāyukatarā ca honti dubbaṇṇatarā ca appesakkhatarā ca.

40.“Now, venerable sir, the being who was reborn first there is longer-lived, more beautiful, and more powerful. But those beings who were reborn later are shorter-lived, less beautiful, and less powerful.”

‘Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, āvuso, vijjati, yaṃ aññataro satto tamhā kāyā cavitvā itthattaṃ āgacchati. Itthattaṃ āgato samāno agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati. Agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito samāno ātappamanvāya padhānamanvāya anuyogamanvāya appamādamanvāya sammāmanasikāramanvāya tathārūpaṃ cetosamādhiṃ phusati, yathāsamāhite citte taṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati; tato paraṃ nānussarati.

‘But it is possible, venerable sir, that a certain being, having passed away from that body, is reborn in this state. Having come to this state, he goes forth from the household life into homelessness. Having gone forth from the household life into homelessness, through ardor, exertion, application, diligence, and right attention, he attains such a samādhi of mind that, with a collected mind, he recollects his past existence; but he does not recollect beyond that.

‘So evamāha – yo kho so bhavaṃ brahmā mahābrahmā abhibhū anabhibhūto aññadatthudaso vasavattī issaro kattā nimmātā seṭṭho sajitā vasī pitā bhūtabhabyānaṃ, yena mayaṃ bhotā brahmunā nimmitā. So nicco dhuvo [sassato dīghāyuko (syā. ka.)] sassato avipariṇāmadhammo sassatisamaṃ tatheva ṭhassati. Ye pana mayaṃ ahumhā tena bhotā brahmunā nimmitā, te mayaṃ aniccā addhuvā [addhuvā asassatā (syā. ka.)] appāyukā cavanadhammā itthattaṃ āgatā’ti. Evaṃvihitakaṃ no tumhe āyasmanto issarakuttaṃ brahmakuttaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethāti. ‘Te evamāhaṃsu – evaṃ kho no, āvuso gotama, sutaṃ, yathevāyasmā gotamo āhā’ti. ‘‘Aggaññañcāhaṃ, bhaggava, pajānāmi. Tañca pajānāmi, tato ca uttaritaraṃ pajānāmi, tañca pajānaṃ na parāmasāmi, aparāmasato ca me paccattaññeva nibbuti viditā. Yadabhijānaṃ tathāgato no anayaṃ āpajjati.

‘He says thus: “That Lord Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the All-Seeing, the All-Powerful, the Lord, the Maker, the Creator, the Best, the Ordainer, the Controller, the Father of those who have been and will be—by him we were created. He is permanent, stable, eternal, not subject to change, and will remain just so for an aeon. But we, who were created by that Lord Brahmā, are impermanent, unstable, short-lived, subject to passing away, having come to this state.” Do you, venerable sirs, proclaim such a doctrine of a lord, a doctrine of Brahmā, a doctrine of a master, or a primal doctrine?’ “They replied: ‘Thus indeed, venerable Gotama, have we heard, just as the venerable Gotama says.’ ‘I, too, Bhaggava, know the primal origin. I know that, and I know what is beyond that. Knowing that, I do not grasp at it. Not grasping, I have realized extinguishment for myself. Knowing this, the Tathāgata does not incur harm.

41. ‘‘Santi, bhaggava, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā khiḍḍāpadosikaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapenti. Tyāhaṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadāmi – ‘saccaṃ kira tumhe āyasmanto khiḍḍāpadosikaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? Te ca me evaṃ puṭṭhā ‘āmo’ti paṭijānanti. Tyāhaṃ evaṃ vadāmi – ‘kathaṃvihitakaṃ pana tumhe āyasmanto khiḍḍāpadosikaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? Te mayā puṭṭhā na sampāyanti, asampāyantā mamaññeva paṭipucchanti, tesāhaṃ puṭṭho byākaromi –

41.“Bhaggava, there are some ascetics and brahmins who proclaim a primal doctrine of a master concerning those corrupted by play. I approach them and say, ‘Is it true, venerable sirs, that you proclaim a primal doctrine of a master concerning those corrupted by play?’ When asked thus, they admit, ‘Yes.’ Then I ask them, ‘But how, venerable sirs, do you proclaim a primal doctrine of a master concerning those corrupted by play?’ When questioned by me, they are unable to explain, and being unable to explain, they in turn question me. When questioned, I explain:

42. ‘Santāvuso, khiḍḍāpadosikā nāma devā. Te ativelaṃ hassakhiḍḍāratidhammasamāpannā [hasakhiḍḍāratidhammasamāpannā (ka.)] viharanti. Tesaṃ ativelaṃ hassakhiḍḍāratidhammasamāpannānaṃ viharataṃ sati sammussati, satiyā sammosā [satiyā sammosāya (syā.)] te devā tamhā kāyā cavanti.

42.‘There are, venerable sir, gods called the Khiḍḍāpadosikā. They live excessively engaged in laughter, play, and amusement. While they live excessively engaged in laughter, play, and amusement, their mindfulness becomes confused. Through the confusion of mindfulness, those gods pass away from that body.

‘Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, āvuso, vijjati, yaṃ aññataro satto tamhā kāyā cavitvā itthattaṃ āgacchati, itthattaṃ āgato samāno agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito samāno ātappamanvāya padhānamanvāya anuyogamanvāya appamādamanvāya sammāmanasikāramanvāya tathārūpaṃ cetosamādhiṃ phusati, yathāsamāhite citte taṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati; tato paraṃ nānussarati.

‘It is indeed possible, venerable sir, that a certain being, having passed away from that body, comes to this state. Having come to this state, he goes forth from the household life into homelessness. Having gone forth from the household life into homelessness, through ardor, exertion, application, diligence, and right attention, he attains such a samādhi of mind that, with a collected mind, he recollects his past existence; but he does not recollect beyond that.

‘So evamāha – ye kho te bhonto devā na khiḍḍāpadosikā te na ativelaṃ hassakhiḍḍāratidhammasamāpannā viharanti. Tesaṃ nātivelaṃ hassakhiḍḍāratidhammasamāpannānaṃ viharataṃ sati na sammussati, satiyā asammosā te devā tamhā kāyā na cavanti, niccā dhuvā sassatā avipariṇāmadhammā sassatisamaṃ tatheva ṭhassanti. Ye pana mayaṃ ahumhā khiḍḍāpadosikā te mayaṃ ativelaṃ hassakhiḍḍāratidhammasamāpannā viharimhā, tesaṃ no ativelaṃ hassakhiḍḍāratidhammasamāpannānaṃ viharataṃ sati sammussati, satiyā sammosā evaṃ [sammosā eva (sī. pī.) sammosā te (syā. ka.)] mayaṃ tamhā kāyā cutā, aniccā addhuvā appāyukā cavanadhammā itthattaṃ āgatāti. Evaṃvihitakaṃ no tumhe āyasmanto khiḍḍāpadosikaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti. ‘Te evamāhaṃsu – evaṃ kho no, āvuso gotama, sutaṃ, yathevāyasmā gotamo āhā’ti. ‘‘Aggaññañcāhaṃ, bhaggava, pajānāmi…pe… yadabhijānaṃ tathāgato no anayaṃ āpajjati.

‘He speaks thus: ‘Those venerable gods who are not corrupted by play do not live excessively engaged in laughter, play, and amusement. While they live not excessively engaged in laughter, play, and amusement, their mindfulness is not confused. Through the clarity of mindfulness, those gods do not pass away from that body. They are permanent, stable, eternal, not subject to change, and will remain just so for an aeon. But we, who were corrupted by play, lived excessively engaged in laughter, play, and amusement. While we lived excessively engaged in laughter, play, and amusement, our mindfulness was confused. Through the confusion of mindfulness, we passed away from that body—impermanent, unstable, short-lived, subject to passing away—and came to this state.’ Thus, you venerable sirs, proclaim such a primal doctrine of a master concerning those corrupted by play?’ ‘They replied: ‘Thus indeed, venerable Gotama, have we heard, just as the venerable Gotama says.’ ‘Bhaggava, I know the primal origin. I know that, and I know what is beyond that. Knowing that, I do not grasp at it. Not grasping, I have realized extinguishment for myself. Knowing this, the Tathāgata does not incur harm.

43. ‘‘Santi, bhaggava, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā manopadosikaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapenti. Tyāhaṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadāmi – ‘saccaṃ kira tumhe āyasmanto manopadosikaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? Te ca me evaṃ puṭṭhā ‘āmo’ti paṭijānanti. Tyāhaṃ evaṃ vadāmi – ‘kathaṃvihitakaṃ pana tumhe āyasmanto manopadosikaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? Te mayā puṭṭhā na sampāyanti, asampāyantā mamaññeva paṭipucchanti. Tesāhaṃ puṭṭho byākaromi –

43.‘There are, Bhaggava, some ascetics and brahmins who proclaim a primal doctrine of a master concerning those corrupted by mind. I approach them and say: ‘Is it true, venerable sirs, that you proclaim a primal doctrine of a master concerning those corrupted by mind?’ When asked thus, they admit: ‘Yes.’ I then ask: ‘But how, venerable sirs, do you proclaim a primal doctrine of a master concerning those corrupted by mind?’ When questioned by me, they are unable to explain, and being unable to explain, they in turn question me. When questioned, I explain:

44. ‘Santāvuso, manopadosikā nāma devā. Te ativelaṃ aññamaññaṃ upanijjhāyanti. Te ativelaṃ aññamaññaṃ upanijjhāyantā aññamaññamhi cittāni padūsenti. Te aññamaññaṃ paduṭṭhacittā kilantakāyā kilantacittā. Te devā tamhā kāyā cavanti.

44.‘There are, venerable sirs, gods called Afflicted-in-Mind. They gaze intently at one another. While gazing intently at one another, they pollute each other’s minds. With minds polluted, they are exhausted in body and mind. Those gods pass away from that body.

‘Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, āvuso, vijjati, yaṃ aññataro satto tamhā kāyā cavitvā itthattaṃ āgacchati. Itthattaṃ āgato samāno agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati. Agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito samāno ātappamanvāya padhānamanvāya anuyogamanvāya appamādamanvāya sammāmanasikāramanvāya tathārūpaṃ cetosamādhiṃ phusati, yathāsamāhite citte taṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati, tato paraṃ nānussarati.

‘It is possible, friend, that a certain being, having passed away from that body, comes to this state. Having come to this state, he goes forth from the household life into homelessness. Having gone forth from the household life into homelessness, through ardour, effort, perseverance, heedfulness, and right attention, he attains such a samādhi of mind that, with his mind thus collected, he recollects that former dwelling, but recollects nothing beyond that.

‘So evamāha – ye kho te bhonto devā na manopadosikā te nātivelaṃ aññamaññaṃ upanijjhāyanti. Te nātivelaṃ aññamaññaṃ upanijjhāyantā aññamaññamhi cittāni nappadūsenti. Te aññamaññaṃ appaduṭṭhacittā akilantakāyā akilantacittā. Te devā tamhā [akilantacittā tamhā (ka.)] kāyā na cavanti, niccā dhuvā sassatā avipariṇāmadhammā sassatisamaṃ tatheva ṭhassanti. Ye pana mayaṃ ahumhā manopadosikā, te mayaṃ ativelaṃ aññamaññaṃ upanijjhāyimhā. Te mayaṃ ativelaṃ aññamaññaṃ upanijjhāyantā aññamaññamhi cittāni padūsimhā [padosiyimhā (syā.), padūsayimhā (?)]. Te mayaṃ aññamaññaṃ paduṭṭhacittā kilantakāyā kilantacittā. Evaṃ mayaṃ [kilantacittāeva mayaṃ (sī. pī.), kilantacittā (ka.)] tamhā kāyā cutā, aniccā addhuvā appāyukā cavanadhammā itthattaṃ āgatāti. Evaṃvihitakaṃ no tumhe āyasmanto manopadosikaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti. ‘Te evamāhaṃsu – evaṃ kho no, āvuso gotama, sutaṃ, yathevāyasmā gotamo āhā’ti. ‘‘Aggaññañcāhaṃ, bhaggava, pajānāmi…pe… yadabhijānaṃ tathāgato no anayaṃ āpajjati.

'He says thus: "Those venerable deities who are not prone to mental corruption do not gaze excessively at one another. Not gazing excessively at one another, they do not corrupt each other's minds. With minds uncorrupted by each other, they are unwearied in body and unwearied in mind. Those deities do not pass away from that body; they are permanent, stable, eternal, of an unchangeable nature, and will remain just so for eternity. But we, who were prone to mental corruption, gazed excessively at one another. Gazing excessively at one another, we corrupted each other's minds. With minds corrupted by each other, we became wearied in body and wearied in mind. Thus, we passed away from that body—impermanent, unstable, short-lived, subject to passing away—and come to this state. Therefore, venerable ones, you should establish this teaching of ours, characterized by mental corruption, as the primordial doctrine." 'They replied thus: "Venerable Gotama, thus we have heard, just as the venerable Gotama says." ' "I understand the primordial doctrine, Bhaggava... The Tathāgata does not fall into misfortune concerning what he has directly known."

45. ‘‘Santi, bhaggava, eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā adhiccasamuppannaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapenti. Tyāhaṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadāmi – ‘saccaṃ kira tumhe āyasmanto adhiccasamuppannaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? Te ca me evaṃ puṭṭhā ‘āmo’ti paṭijānanti. Tyāhaṃ evaṃ vadāmi – ‘kathaṃvihitakaṃ pana tumhe āyasmanto adhiccasamuppannaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? Te mayā puṭṭhā na sampāyanti, asampāyantā mamaññeva paṭipucchanti. Tesāhaṃ puṭṭho byākaromi –

45.'Bhaggava, there are some ascetics and brahmins who proclaim a primordial doctrine of adventitious origination. Having approached them, I say: "Is it true, venerable ones, that you proclaim a primordial doctrine of adventitious origination?" When asked thus, they acknowledge: "Yes." Then I say to them: "But how, venerable ones, do you proclaim a primordial doctrine of adventitious origination?" Questioned thus, they are unable to explain, and being unable, they in turn question me. When asked, I explain to them:

46. ‘Santāvuso, asaññasattā nāma devā. Saññuppādā ca pana te devā tamhā kāyā cavanti.

46.'Friend, there are deities called the non-percipient beings. But those deities pass away from that body with the arising of perception.'

‘Ṭhānaṃ kho panetaṃ, āvuso, vijjati. Yaṃ aññataro satto tamhā kāyā cavitvā itthattaṃ āgacchati. Itthattaṃ āgato samāno agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati. Agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajito samāno ātappamanvāya padhānamanvāya anuyogamanvāya appamādamanvāya sammāmanasikāramanvāya tathārūpaṃ cetosamādhiṃ phusati, yathāsamāhite citte taṃ [idaṃ padaṃ brahmajālasutte na dissati. evaṃ (pī. ka.)] saññuppādaṃ anussarati, tato paraṃ nānussarati.

'It is possible, friend, that a certain being, having passed away from that body, comes to this state. Having come to this state, he goes forth from the household life into homelessness. Having gone forth from the household life into homelessness, through ardour, effort, perseverance, heedfulness, and right attention, he attains such a samādhi of mind that, with his mind thus collected, he recollects the arising of that perception, but recollects nothing beyond that.

‘So evamāha – adhiccasamuppanno attā ca loko ca. Taṃ kissa hetu? Ahañhi pubbe nāhosiṃ, somhi etarahi ahutvā santatāya [sattakāya (sī. pī.), sattāya (ka. sī.)] pariṇatoti. Evaṃvihitakaṃ no tumhe āyasmanto adhiccasamuppannaṃ ācariyakaṃ aggaññaṃ paññapethā’ti? ‘Te evamāhaṃsu – evaṃ kho no, āvuso gotama, sutaṃ yathevāyasmā gotamo āhā’ti. ‘‘Aggaññañcāhaṃ, bhaggava, pajānāmi tañca pajānāmi, tato ca uttaritaraṃ pajānāmi, tañca pajānaṃ na parāmasāmi, aparāmasato ca me paccattaññeva nibbuti viditā. Yadabhijānaṃ tathāgato no anayaṃ āpajjati.

'He says thus: "The self and the world arose adventitiously. Why is that? For formerly I was not; now I am, having become through continuity from non-being." Do you, venerable ones, proclaim as foremost a teaching thus devised, adventitiously arisen, the primordial doctrine?' 'They replied: "Venerable Gotama, thus we have heard, just as the venerable Gotama says." ' "I understand, Bhaggava, the primordial doctrine, and I understand that which is beyond it; and understanding it, I do not grasp at it. From not grasping, cessation has been realized by me for myself. Knowing thus, the Tathāgata does not fall into misfortune."

47. ‘‘Evaṃvādiṃ kho maṃ, bhaggava, evamakkhāyiṃ eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā asatā tucchā musā abhūtena abbhācikkhanti – ‘viparīto samaṇo gotamo bhikkhavo ca. Samaṇo gotamo evamāha – yasmiṃ samaye subhaṃ vimokkhaṃ upasampajja viharati, sabbaṃ tasmiṃ samaye asubhantveva [asubhanteva (sī. syā. pī.)] pajānātī’ti [sañjānātīti (sī. pī.)]. Na kho panāhaṃ, bhaggava, evaṃ vadāmi – ‘yasmiṃ samaye subhaṃ vimokkhaṃ upasampajja viharati, sabbaṃ tasmiṃ samaye asubhantveva pajānātī’ti. Evañca khvāhaṃ, bhaggava, vadāmi – ‘yasmiṃ samaye subhaṃ vimokkhaṃ upasampajja viharati, subhantveva tasmiṃ samaye pajānātī’ti.

47.Bhaggava, some ascetics and brahmins, when I speak thus and explain thus, falsely, emptily, untruly, and groundlessly misrepresent me, saying: 'The ascetic Gotama is perverse, and so are his monks. The ascetic Gotama says thus: "When one enters and dwells in the beautiful liberation, at that time one perceives everything as ugly."' But, Bhaggava, I do not say thus: 'When one enters and dwells in the beautiful liberation, at that time one perceives everything as ugly.' Rather, Bhaggava, I say thus: 'When one enters and dwells in the beautiful liberation, at that time one perceives it as beautiful.'

‘‘Te ca, bhante, viparītā, ye bhagavantaṃ viparītato dahanti bhikkhavo ca. Evaṃpasanno ahaṃ, bhante, bhagavati. Pahoti me bhagavā tathā dhammaṃ desetuṃ, yathā ahaṃ subhaṃ vimokkhaṃ upasampajja vihareyya’’nti.

Venerable sir, those who misrepresent the Blessed One are indeed perverse, and so are his monks. I have such confidence in the Blessed One, venerable sir. The Blessed One is capable of teaching me the Dhamma in such a way that I might attain and abide in the beautiful liberation.

48. ‘‘Dukkaraṃ kho etaṃ, bhaggava, tayā aññadiṭṭhikena aññakhantikena aññarucikena aññatrāyogena aññatrācariyakena subhaṃ vimokkhaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. Iṅgha tvaṃ, bhaggava, yo ca te ayaṃ mayi pasādo, tameva tvaṃ sādhukamanurakkhā’’ti. ‘‘Sace taṃ, bhante, mayā dukkaraṃ aññadiṭṭhikena aññakhantikena aññarucikena aññatrāyogena aññatrācariyakena subhaṃ vimokkhaṃ upasampajja viharituṃ. Yo ca me ayaṃ, bhante, bhagavati pasādo, tamevāhaṃ sādhukamanurakkhissāmī’’ti. Idamavoca bhagavā. Attamano bhaggavagotto paribbājako bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandīti.

48."It is difficult, Bhaggava, for you—with other views, other acceptances, other preferences, a different practice, and a different teacher—to attain and abide in the beautiful liberation. Come now, Bhaggava, carefully maintain that confidence you have in me." "If it is difficult, venerable sir, for me—with other views, other acceptances, other preferences, a different practice, and a different teacher—to attain and abide in the beautiful liberation, then I will indeed carefully maintain the confidence I have in the Blessed One." This is what the Blessed One said. Pleased, the wanderer Bhaggavagotta rejoiced at the Blessed One's words.

Pāthikasuttaṃ [pāṭikasuttantaṃ (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] niṭṭhitaṃ paṭhamaṃ.

The Pāṭhika Sutta, the first, is concluded.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:dn24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[DA15]] | D iii 1 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DA15]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[DN]]  / 🌐 [[DN24]]
> ◄  [[dn23-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[dn25-deepseek-pali]] ►
