---
sutta_code: "SN25.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Cakkhusutta "
  - "The Eye"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN25]]  / 🌐 [[SN25.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn25.2-thanissaro]] ►

## SN25.1 The Eye

## ## Cakkhu Sutta


Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, the eye is inconstant, changeable, alterable. The ear… The nose… The tongue… The body… The mind is inconstant, changeable, alterable.

“One who has conviction & belief that these phenomena are this way is called a faith-follower: one who has entered the orderliness of rightness, entered the plane of people of integrity, transcended the plane of the run-of-the-mill. He is incapable of doing any deed by which he might be reborn in hell, in the animal womb, or in the realm of hungry ghosts. He is incapable of passing away until he has realized the fruit of stream-entry.

“One who, after pondering with a modicum of discernment, has accepted that these phenomena are this way is called a Dhamma-follower: one who has entered the orderliness of rightness, entered the plane of people of integrity, transcended the plane of the run-of-the-mill. He is incapable of doing any deed by which he might be reborn in hell, in the animal womb, or in the realm of hungry ghosts. He is incapable of passing away until he has realized the fruit of stream-entry.

“One who knows and sees that these phenomena are this way is called a stream-enterer, steadfast, never again destined for states of woe, headed for self-awakening.”

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn70-thanissaro]], [[sn55.25-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).

# [Forms  
Rūpa Sutta  ([[snp25.2-thanissaro]])](SN25_2.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, forms are inconstant, changeable, alterable. Sounds.… Aromas.… Flavors.… Tactile sensations.… Ideas are inconstant, changeable, alterable.…

# [Consciousness  
Viññāṇa Sutta  ([[snp25.3-thanissaro]])](SN25_3.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, eye-consciousness is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Ear-consciousness.… Nose-consciousness.… Tongue-consciousness.… Body-consciousness.… Intellect-consciousness is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…

# [Contact  
Phassa Sutta  ([[snp25.4-thanissaro]])](SN25_4.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, eye-contact is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Ear-contact.… Nose-contact.… Tongue-contact.… Body-contact.… Intellect-contact is inconstant, changeable, alterable…

# [Feeling  
Vedanā Sutta  ([[snp25.5-thanissaro]])](SN25_5.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, feeling born of eye-contact is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Feeling born of ear-contact.… Feeling born of nose-contact.… Feeling born of tongue-contact.… Feeling born of body-contact.… Feeling born of intellect-contact is inconstant, changeable, alterable…

# [Perception  
Saññā Sutta  ([[snp25.6-thanissaro]])](SN25_6.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, perception of forms is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Perception of sounds.… Perception of smells.… Perception of tastes.… Perception of tactile sensations.… Perception of ideas is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…

# [Intention  
Cetanā Sutta  ([[snp25.7-thanissaro]])](SN25_7.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, intention for forms is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Intention for sounds.… Intention for smells.… Intention for tastes.… Intention for tactile sensations.… Intention for ideas is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…

# [Craving  
Taṇhā Sutta  ([[snp25.8-thanissaro]])](SN25_8.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, craving for forms is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Craving for sounds.… Craving for smells.… Craving for tastes.… Craving for tactile sensations.… Craving for ideas is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…

# [Properties  
Dhātu Sutta  ([[snp25.9-thanissaro]])](SN25_9.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, the earth property is inconstant, changeable, alterable. The liquid property.… The fire property.… The wind property.… The space property.… The consciousness property is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…

# [Aggregates  
Khandha Sutta  ([[snp25.10-thanissaro]])](SN25_10.html)

Near Sāvatthī. “bhikkhus, form is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Feeling.… Perception.… Fabrications.… Consciousness is inconstant, changeable, alterable.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn25.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 225 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN70]], [[MN22]], [[SN48.12]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN25]]  / 🌐 [[SN25.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn25.2-thanissaro]] ►
