---

nikaya:

- "SN"

- "Saṃyutta Nikāya"

contribution:

- index

---

# 📒 SN - Saṁyutta Nikāya

> [!TIP]- Samyuttas
>
> | Verses | Causation | Aggregates | Sense Bases | Great Book |
> | ---------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |
> | [[SN1-11]] | [[SN12-21]] | [[SN22-34]] | [[SN35-44]] | [[SN45-56]] |
> 
> | [[SN35]] | [[SN36]] | [[SN37]] | [[SN38]] | [[SN39]] |
> | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
> | [[SN40]] | [[SN41]] | [[SN42]] | [[SN43]] | [[SN44]] |

## SN35-44 Six Sense Bases - Salāyatanavagga

### 📂 SN41 - Cittasaṁyutta - Citta

> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.1]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.1-) - Saṁyojanasutta –  Fetter
> Citta the householder hears of a conversation among the monks regarding the distinction between the fetters and the things that are fettered. He goes to ask them on this topic, but they are unable to give a satisfactory answer, so he explained it to them. It is desire that is the fetter, like the yoke that binds two oxen.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.2]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.2-) - Paṭhamaisidattasutta – Isidatta (1)
> Citta the householder invites some bhikkhus to his home for a meal. He asks them about the diversity of the elements, but only the junior monk, isidatta, is able to answer.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.3]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.3-) - Mahakapāṭihāriyasutta – Mahaka's Miracle
> On the origin of self-view. In this touching story, ven. Isidatta, a wise young forest monk, declines his elders' invitation to become a Dhamma teacher, and instead quietly slips off into the forest and disappears.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.4]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.4-) - Dutiyaisidattasutta – Isidatta (2)
> Citta the householder invites some bhikkhus to his home for a meal. He asks them about the diversity of the elements, but only the junior monk, isidatta, is able to answer.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.5]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.5-) - Paṭhamakāmabhūsutta – Kamabhū (1)
> Citta the householder explains to a monk the meaning of a metaphorical verse previously uttered by the Buddha .


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.6]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.6-) - Dutiyakāmabhūsutta – Kamabhū (2)
> Citta asks kāmabhū about the different kinds of processes (saṅkhāra) in a series of questions that lead to the most profound of meditation experiences.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.7]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.7-) - Godattasutta – Godatta
> Venerable godatta asks Citta whether the liberations of measurelessness, nothingness, emptiness, and signlessness are different states, or just different words for the same thing. Citta explains that they are both: they are terms for different meditation experiences, but may also be used of perfection or arahantship


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.8]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.8-) - Nigaṇṭhanāṭaputtasutta – Niganṭha Nataputta
> The jain leader mahāvīra, known as nigaṇṭha nātaputa in the buddhist tradition, is visited by Citta. Mahāvīra asks him whether he believes in a certain state of immersion. When Citta replies that he doesn’t go by faith in the Buddha  on this point, mahāvīra is delighted. But it turns out Citta doesn’t need faith, as he experiences such a state for himself.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.9]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.9-) - Acelakassapasutta – The Naked Asetic Kassapa
> The jain leader mahāvīra, known as nigaṇṭha nātaputa in the buddhist tradition, is visited by Citta. Mahāvīra asks him whether he believes in a certain state of immersion. When Citta replies that he doesn’t go by faith in the Buddha  on this point, mahāvīra is delighted. But it turns out Citta doesn’t need faith, as he experiences such a state for himself.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN41.10]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn41.10-) - Gilānadassanasutta – Seeing The Sick
> While on his deathbed, Citta delivers an inspiring teaching on generosity to his friends, his family, and a gathering of devas.
