---
sutta_code: "AN10.70"
sutta_title:
  - "Kathavatthu "
  - "Discussion Topics"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.70]]
> ◄  [[an10.69-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.71-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### VII. Pairs — AN 10.70: Topics of Discussion (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

Now at that time, after the meal, on return from alms-round, several bhikkhus sat together in the meeting hall. They engaged in all kinds of unworthy talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and nations; talk about women and heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; miscellaneous talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that state of existence.


2“bhikkhus, there are ten grounds for praise. What ten?

It’s when a bhikkhu personally has few wishes, and speaks to the bhikkhus on having few wishes. This is a ground for praise.

3A bhikkhu personally is content, and speaks to the bhikkhus on contentment. This is a ground for praise.

4A bhikkhu personally is secluded, and speaks to the bhikkhus on seclusion. This is a ground for praise.

5A bhikkhu personally doesn’t mix closely with others, and speaks to the bhikkhus on not mixing closely with others. This is a ground for praise.

6A bhikkhu personally is energetic, and speaks to the bhikkhus on being energetic. This is a ground for praise.

7A bhikkhu personally is accomplished in ethics, and speaks to the bhikkhus on being accomplished in ethics. This is a ground for praise.

8A bhikkhu personally is accomplished in immersion, and speaks to the bhikkhus on being accomplished in immersion. This is a ground for praise.

9A bhikkhu personally is accomplished in wisdom, and speaks to the bhikkhus on being accomplished in wisdom. This is a ground for praise.

10A bhikkhu personally is accomplished in freedom, and speaks to the bhikkhus on being accomplished in freedom. This is a ground for praise.

11A bhikkhu personally is accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom, and speaks to the bhikkhus on being accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom. This is a ground for praise.

12These are the ten grounds for praise.”


#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.

Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū pacchābhattaṁ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ sannisinnā sannipatitā anekavihitaṁ tiracchānakathaṁ anuyuttā viharanti, seyyathidaṁ – rājakathaṁ corakathaṁ mahāmattakathaṁ … pe … itibhavābhavakathaṁ iti vāti.


2"Dasayimāni, bhikkhave, pāsaṁsāni ṭhānāni. Katamāni dasa?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu attanā ca appiccho hoti, appicchakathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Appiccho bhikkhu appicchakathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (1)

3Attanā ca santuṭṭho hoti, santuṭṭhikathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Santuṭṭho bhikkhu santuṭṭhikathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (2)

4Attanā ca pavivitto hoti, pavivekakathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Pavivitto bhikkhu pavivekakathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (3)

5Attanā ca asaṁsaṭṭho hoti, asaṁsaṭṭhakathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Asaṁsaṭṭho bhikkhu asaṁsaṭṭhakathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (4)

6Attanā ca āraddhavīriyo hoti, vīriyārambhakathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Āraddhavīriyo bhikkhu vīriyārambhakathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (5)

7Attanā ca sīlasampanno hoti, sīlasampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Sīlasampanno bhikkhu sīlasampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (6)

8Attanā ca samādhisampanno hoti, samādhisampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Samādhisampanno bhikkhu samādhisampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (7)

9Attanā ca paññāsampanno hoti, paññāsampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Paññāsampanno bhikkhu paññāsampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (8)

10Attanā ca vimuttisampanno hoti, vimuttisampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Vimuttisampanno bhikkhu vimuttisampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (9)

11Attanā ca vimuttiñāṇadassanasampanno hoti, vimuttiñāṇadassanasampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā hoti. ‘Vimuttiñāṇadassanasampanno bhikkhu vimuttiñāṇadassanasampadākathañca bhikkhūnaṁ kattā’ti pāsaṁsametaṁ ṭhānaṁ. (10)

12Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dasa pāsaṁsāni ṭhānānī"ti.


Dasamaṁ.

Yamakavaggo dutiyo.

13Avijjā taṇhā niṭṭhā ca,  
avecca dve sukhāni ca;  
Naḷakapāne dve vuttā,  
kathāvatthūpare duveti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.70-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA47.4]] | A v 129 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.69]], [[EA47.4]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[UD2.2]], [[AN9.1]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.70]]
> ◄  [[an10.69-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.71-sujato-pali]] ►
