---
sutta_code: "AN10.106"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.106]]
> ◄  [[an10.105-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.107-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XI. Perceptions for Ascetics — AN 10.106: Wearing Away
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are these ten grounds for wearing away. What ten?

For one of right view, wrong view is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are worn away. And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

2For one of right thought, wrong thought is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong thought are worn away. And because of right thought, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

3For one of right speech, wrong speech is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong speech are worn away. And because of right speech, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

4For one of right action, wrong action is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong action are worn away. And because of right action, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

5For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong livelihood are worn away. And because of right livelihood, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

6For one of right effort, wrong effort is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong effort are worn away. And because of right effort, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

7For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong mindfulness are worn away. And because of right mindfulness, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

8For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong immersion are worn away. And because of right immersion, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

9For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong knowledge are worn away. And because of right knowledge, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

10For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are worn away. And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

11These are the ten grounds for wearing away.”

1"Dasayimāni, bhikkhave, nijjaravatthūni. Katamāni dasa?

Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi nijjiṇṇā hoti; ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (1)

2Sammāsaṅkappassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo nijjiṇṇo hoti; ye ca micchāsaṅkappapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammāsaṅkappapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (2)

3Sammāvācassa, bhikkhave, micchāvācā nijjiṇṇā hoti; ye ca micchāvācāpaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammāvācāpaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (3)

4Sammākammantassa, bhikkhave, micchākammanto nijjiṇṇo hoti; ye ca micchākammantapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammākammantapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (4)

5Sammāājīvassa, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo nijjiṇṇo hoti; ye ca micchāājīvapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammāājīvapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (5)

6Sammāvāyāmassa, bhikkhave, micchāvāyāmo nijjiṇṇo hoti; ye ca micchāvāyāmapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammāvāyāmapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (6)

7Sammāsatissa, bhikkhave, micchāsati nijjiṇṇā hoti; ye ca micchāsatipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammāsatipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (7)

8Sammāsamādhissa, bhikkhave, micchāsamādhi nijjiṇṇo hoti; ye ca micchāsamādhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammāsamādhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (8)

9Sammāñāṇissa, bhikkhave, micchāñāṇaṁ nijjiṇṇaṁ hoti; ye ca micchāñāṇapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammāñāṇapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (9)

10Sammāvimuttissa, bhikkhave, micchāvimutti nijjiṇṇā hoti; ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa nijjiṇṇā honti; sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti. (10)

11Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dasa nijjaravatthūnī"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.106-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 215 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DN34]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.106]]
> ◄  [[an10.105-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.107-sujato-pali]] ►
