---
sutta_code: "AN10.118"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṅgārava "
  - "With Saṅgārava"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.118]]
> ◄  [[an10.117-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.119-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XII. The Ceremony of Descent — AN 10.118: The Near Shore
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the near shore and the far shore. Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.”

“Yes, sir,” they replied. The Buddha said this:

2“And what, bhikkhus, is the near shore? What is the far shore? Wrong view is the near shore, and right view is the far shore. … Wrong freedom is the near shore, and right freedom is the far shore. This is the near shore, and this is the far shore.


3Few are those among humans  
who cross to the far shore.  
The rest just run  
around on the near shore.

4When the teaching is well explained,  
those who practice accordingly  
are the ones who will cross over  
Death’s domain so hard to pass.

5Rid of dark qualities,  
an astute person should develop the bright.  
Leaving home behind  
for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,

6you should try to find delight there,  
having left behind sensual pleasures.  
With no possessions, an astute person  
should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.

7And those whose minds are rightly developed  
in the awakening factors;  
letting go of attachments,  
they delight in not grasping.  
With defilements ended, brilliant,  
they are extinguished in this world.”

1"Orimañca, bhikkhave, tīraṁ desessāmi pārimañca tīraṁ. Taṁ suṇātha, sādhukaṁ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etadavoca: 

2"Katamañca, bhikkhave, orimaṁ tīraṁ, katamañca pārimaṁ tīraṁ? Micchādiṭṭhi orimaṁ tīraṁ, sammādiṭṭhi pārimaṁ tīraṁ … pe … micchāvimutti orimaṁ tīraṁ, sammāvimutti pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Idaṁ kho, bhikkhave, orimaṁ tīraṁ, idaṁ pārimaṁ tīranti.


3Appakā te manussesu,  
ye janā pāragāmino;  
Athāyaṁ itarā pajā,  
tīramevānudhāvati.

4Ye ca kho sammadakkhāte,  
dhamme dhammānuvattino;  
Te janā pāramessanti,  
maccudheyyaṁ suduttaraṁ.

5Kaṇhaṁ dhammaṁ vippahāya,  
sukkaṁ bhāvetha paṇḍito;  
Okā anokamāgamma,  
viveke yattha dūramaṁ.

6Tatrābhiratimiccheyya,  
hitvā kāme akiñcano;  
Pariyodapeyya attānaṁ,  
cittaklesehi paṇḍito.

7Yesaṁ sambodhiyaṅgesu,  
sammā cittaṁ subhāvitaṁ;  
Ādānapaṭinissagge,  
anupādāya ye ratā;  
Khīṇāsavā jutimanto,  
te loke parinibbutā"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.118-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 233 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DHP\|DHP85]], [[AN10.117]], [[AN10.169]], [[AN10.170]], [[SN45.34]], [[SN46.17]], [[DHP\|DHP86]], [[DHP\|DHP87]], [[DHP\|DHP88]], [[DHP\|DHP89]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.118]]
> ◄  [[an10.117-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.119-sujato-pali]] ►
