---
sutta_code: "AN10.40"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṃghasāmaggī "
  - "Harmony In The Saṅgha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.40]]
> ◄  [[an10.39-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.41-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### IV. With Upāli — AN 10.40: With Ānanda (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“Sir, they speak of ‘harmony in the Saṅgha’. How is harmony in the Saṅgha defined?”

“Ānanda, it’s when a bhikkhu explains what is not the teaching as not the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One. On these ten grounds they don’t split off and go their own way. They don’t perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic code autonomously. That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined.”


“But sir, what does someone who has created harmony in a schismatic Saṅgha bring upon themselves?”

“They bring divine merit upon themselves.”

“But what is divine merit?”

“They rejoice in heaven for an eon, Ānanda.


3A Saṅgha in harmony is happy,  
as is support for those in harmony.  
Basing themselves in the teaching,  
favoring harmony, they destroy no sanctuary.  
After creating harmony in the Saṅgha,  
they rejoice in heaven for an eon.”

1"‘Saṅghasāmaggī, saṅghasāmaggī’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, saṅgho samaggo hotī"ti?

"Idhānanda, bhikkhū adhammaṁ adhammoti dīpenti, dhammaṁ dhammoti dīpenti, avinayaṁ avinayoti dīpenti, vinayaṁ vinayoti dīpenti, abhāsitaṁ alapitaṁ tathāgatena abhāsitaṁ alapitaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, bhāsitaṁ lapitaṁ tathāgatena bhāsitaṁ lapitaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, anāciṇṇaṁ tathāgatena anāciṇṇaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, āciṇṇaṁ tathāgatena āciṇṇaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, apaññattaṁ tathāgatena apaññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, paññattaṁ tathāgatena paññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti. Te imehi dasahi vatthūhi na avakassanti na apakassanti na āveni kammāni karonti na āveni pātimokkhaṁ uddisanti. Ettāvatā kho, ānanda, saṅgho samaggo hotī"ti.


2"Bhinnaṁ pana, bhante, saṅghaṁ samaggaṁ katvā kiṁ so pasavatī"ti?

"Brahmaṁ, ānanda, puññaṁ pasavatī"ti.

"Kiṁ pana, bhante, brahmaṁ puññan"ti?

"Kappaṁ, ānanda, saggamhi modatīti – 


3Sukhā saṅghassa sāmaggī,  
samaggānañca anuggaho;  
Samaggarato dhammaṭṭho,  
yogakkhemā na dhaṁsati;  
Saṅghaṁ samaggaṁ katvāna,  
kappaṁ saggamhi modatī"ti.

Dasamaṁ.

Upālivaggo catuttho.

> 4Upāli ṭhapanā ubbāho,  
> upasampadanissayā;  
> Sāmaṇero ca dve bhedā,  
> ānandehi pare duveti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.40-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 76 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[ITI19]], [[PLI-TV-KD17]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.40]]
> ◄  [[an10.39-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.41-sujato-pali]] ►
