---
sutta_code: "AN10.25"
sutta_title:
  - "Kasina "
  - "Meditation On Universals"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.25]]
> ◄  [[an10.24-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.26-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### III. The Great Chapter — AN 10.25: Meditation on Universals
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are these ten universal dimensions of meditation. What ten? Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above, below, across, non-dual and limitless. They perceive the meditation on universal water … the meditation on universal fire … the meditation on universal air … the meditation on universal blue … the meditation on universal yellow … the meditation on universal red … the meditation on universal white … the meditation on universal space … They perceive the meditation on universal consciousness above, below, across, non-dual and limitless. These are the ten universal dimensions of meditation.”

1"Dasayimāni, bhikkhave, kasiṇāyatanāni. Katamāni dasa? Pathavīkasiṇameko sañjānāti uddhaṁ adho tiriyaṁ advayaṁ appamāṇaṁ; āpokasiṇameko sañjānāti … pe … tejokasiṇameko sañjānāti … vāyokasiṇameko sañjānāti … nīlakasiṇameko sañjānāti … pītakasiṇameko sañjānāti … lohitakasiṇameko sañjānāti … odātakasiṇameko sañjānāti … ākāsakasiṇameko sañjānāti … viññāṇakasiṇameko sañjānāti uddhaṁ adho tiriyaṁ advayaṁ appamāṇaṁ. Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dasa kasiṇāyatanānī"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.25-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 46 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.29]], [[DN33]], [[DN34]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.25]]
> ◄  [[an10.24-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.26-sujato-pali]] ►
