---
sutta_code: "AN10.15"
sutta_title:
  - "Appamāda "
  - "Diligence"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.15]]
> ◄  [[an10.14-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.16-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### II. A Protector — AN 10.15: Diligence
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings — be they footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless; with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.

2The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant’s footprint, so an elephant’s footprint is said to be the biggest of them all. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.

3The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.


4Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. In the same way …

5Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the best. In the same way …

6Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. In the same way …

7All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. In the same way …

8The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the moon’s radiance, so the moon’s radiance is said to be the best of them all. In the same way …

9After the rainy season the sky is clear and cloudless. And when the sun rises, it dispels all the darkness from the sky as it shines and glows and radiates. In the same way …


10All the great rivers — that is, the Ganges, Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī — flow, slant, slope, and incline towards the ocean, and the ocean is said to be the greatest of them. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.”

1"Yāvatā, bhikkhave, sattā apadā vā dvipadā vā catuppadā vā bahuppadā vā rūpino vā arūpino vā saññino vā asaññino vā nevasaññināsaññino vā, tathāgato tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati arahaṁ sammāsambuddho; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave, ye keci kusalā dhammā, sabbe te appamādamūlakā appamādasamosaraṇā. Appamādo tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati. (1)

2Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yāni kānici jaṅgalānaṁ pāṇānaṁ padajātāni, sabbāni tāni hatthipade samodhānaṁ gacchanti, hatthipadaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ mahantattena; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave, ye keci kusalā dhammā, sabbe te appamādamūlakā appamādasamosaraṇā. Appamādo tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati. (2)

3Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kūṭāgārassa yā kāci gopānasiyo sabbā tā kūṭaṅgamā kūṭaninnā kūṭasamosaraṇā, kūṭo tāsaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave, ye keci kusalā dhammā, sabbe te appamādamūlakā appamādasamosaraṇā. Appamādo tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati. (3)


4Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci mūlagandhā, kāḷānusāriyaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave … pe … . (4)

5Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci sāragandhā, lohitacandanaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave … pe … . (5)

6Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci pupphagandhā, vassikaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave … pe … . (6)

7Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci khuddarājāno, sabbe te rañño cakkavattissa anuyantā bhavanti, rājā tesaṁ cakkavattī aggamakkhāyati; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave … pe … . (7)

8Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yā kāci tārakarūpānaṁ pabhā, sabbā tā candappabhāya kalaṁ nāgghanti soḷasiṁ, candappabhā tāsaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave … pe … . (8)

9Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, saradasamaye viddhe vigatavalāhake deve ādicco nabhaṁ abbhussakkamāno sabbaṁ ākāsagataṁ tamagataṁ abhivihacca bhāsate ca tapate ca virocati ca; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave … pe … . (9)


10Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, yā kāci mahānadiyo, seyyathidaṁ – gaṅgā, yamunā, aciravatī, sarabhū, mahī, sabbā tā samuddaṅgamā samuddaninnā samuddapoṇā samuddapabbhārā, mahāsamuddo tāsaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave, ye keci kusalā dhammā, sabbe te appamādamūlakā appamādasamosaraṇā. Appamādo tesaṁ aggamakkhāyatī"ti. (10)

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.15-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 21 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN45.146-148]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.15]]
> ◄  [[an10.14-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.16-sujato-pali]] ►
