---
sutta_code: "AN10.57"
sutta_title:
  - "Saññā "
  - "Perceptions"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.57]]
> ◄  [[an10.56-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.58-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### VI. Your Own Mind — AN 10.57: Perceptions (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in the deathless and end with the deathless. What ten? The perceptions of impermanence, not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world, a skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a split open corpse, and a bloated corpse. These ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in the deathless and end with the deathless.”

1"Dasayimā, bhikkhave, saññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā honti mahānisaṁsā amatogadhā amatapariyosānā. Katamā dasa? Aniccasaññā, anattasaññā, maraṇasaññā, āhāre paṭikūlasaññā, sabbaloke anabhiratasaññā, aṭṭhikasaññā, puḷavakasaññā, vinīlakasaññā, vicchiddakasaññā, uddhumātakasaññā – imā kho, bhikkhave, dasa saññā bhāvitā bahulīkatā mahapphalā honti mahānisaṁsā amatogadhā amatapariyosānā"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.57-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA46.10]] | A v 106 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA46.10]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN7.48]], [[AN10.60]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.57]]
> ◄  [[an10.56-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.58-sujato-pali]] ►
