---
sutta_code: "AN10.41"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṃghabheda "
  - "Schism In The Saṅgha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.41]]
> ◄  [[an10.40-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.42-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### V. Abuse — AN 10.41: Arguments
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason, why arguments, quarrels, and disputes arise in the Saṅgha, and the bhikkhus don’t live happily?”


“Upāli, it’s when a bhikkhu explains what is not the teaching as the teaching, and what is the teaching as not the teaching. They explain what is not the training as the training, and what is the training as not the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One.

This is the cause, this is the reason why arguments, quarrels, and disputes arise in the Saṅgha, and the bhikkhus don’t live happily.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho āyasmā upāli yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā upāli bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 

"Ko nu kho, bhante, hetu ko paccayo, yena saṅghe bhaṇḍanakalahaviggahavivādā uppajjanti, bhikkhū ca na phāsu viharantī"ti?


"Idhupāli, bhikkhū adhammaṁ dhammoti dīpenti, dhammaṁ adhammoti dīpenti, avinayaṁ vinayoti dīpenti, vinayaṁ avinayoti dīpenti, abhāsitaṁ alapitaṁ tathāgatena bhāsitaṁ lapitaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, bhāsitaṁ lapitaṁ tathāgatena abhāsitaṁ alapitaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, anāciṇṇaṁ tathāgatena āciṇṇaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, āciṇṇaṁ tathāgatena anāciṇṇaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, apaññattaṁ tathāgatena paññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, paññattaṁ tathāgatena apaññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti.

Ayaṁ kho, upāli, hetu ayaṁ paccayo, yena saṅghe bhaṇḍanakalahaviggahavivādā uppajjanti, bhikkhū ca na phāsu viharantī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.41-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 77 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.41]]
> ◄  [[an10.40-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.42-sujato-pali]] ►
