---
sutta_code: "AN10.35"
sutta_title:
  - "Upasampadā "
  - "Ordination"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.35]]
> ◄  [[an10.34-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.36-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### IV. With Upāli — AN 10.35: Dependence
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“Sir, how many qualities should a bhikkhu have to give dependence?”

“Upāli, a bhikkhu should have ten qualities to give dependence. What ten?

It’s when a bhikkhu is ethical … They’re learned … Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well judged in both the rules and accompanying material. They’re able to care for the sick or get someone else to do so. They’re able to settle dissatisfaction or get someone else to do so. They’re able to dispel remorse when it has come up. They’re able to rationally dissuade someone from misconceptions that come up. They’re able to encourage someone in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. A bhikkhu should have these ten qualities to give dependence.”

1"Katihi nu kho, bhante, dhammehi samannāgatena bhikkhunā nissayo dātabbo"ti?

"Dasahi kho, upāli, dhammehi samannāgatena bhikkhunā nissayo dātabbo. Katamehi dasahi?

Idhupāli, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; bahussuto hoti … pe … diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; pātimokkhaṁ kho panassa vitthārena svāgataṁ hoti suvibhattaṁ suppavattaṁ suvinicchitaṁ suttaso anubyañjanaso; paṭibalo hoti gilānaṁ upaṭṭhātuṁ vā upaṭṭhāpetuṁ vā; paṭibalo hoti anabhiratiṁ vūpakāsetuṁ vā vūpakāsāpetuṁ vā; paṭibalo hoti uppannaṁ kukkuccaṁ dhammato vinodetuṁ; paṭibalo hoti uppannaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ dhammato vivecetuṁ; paṭibalo hoti adhisīle … pe … adhicitte … adhipaññāya samādapetuṁ.

Imehi kho, upāli, dasahi dhammehi samannāgatena bhikkhunā nissayo dātabbo"ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.35-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 73 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.35]]
> ◄  [[an10.34-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.36-sujato-pali]] ►
