---
sutta_code: "AN10.71"
sutta_title:
  - "Ākaṅkha "
  - "Wishes"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.71]]
> ◄  [[an10.70-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.72-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### VIII. If You Want — AN 10.71: One Might Wish
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. There the Buddha addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus!”

“Venerable sir,” they replied. The Buddha said this:


2“bhikkhus, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the code of conduct, conducting yourselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.

3A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I be liked and approved by my spiritual companions, respected and admired.’ So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect jhāna, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts.

4A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.’ So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect jhāna, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts.

5A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May the services of those whose robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick I enjoy be very fruitful and beneficial for them.’ So let them fulfill their precepts …

6A bhikkhu might wish: ‘When deceased family and relatives who have passed away recollect me with a confident mind, may this be very fruitful and beneficial for them.’ So let them fulfill their precepts …

7A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I be content with any kind of robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.’ So let them fulfill their precepts …

8A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I endure cold, heat, hunger, and thirst. May I endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. May I endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And may I put up with physical pain — sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening.’ So let them fulfill their precepts …

9A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I prevail over desire and discontent, and may desire and discontent not prevail over me. May I live having mastered desire and discontent whenever they have arisen.’ So let them fulfill their precepts …

10A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I prevail over fear and dread, and may fear and dread not prevail over me. May I live having mastered fear and dread whenever they arise.’ So let them fulfill their precepts …

11A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I get the four jhānas — blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind — when I want, without trouble or difficulty.’ So let them fulfill their precepts …

12A bhikkhu might wish: ‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect jhāna, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts.


13‘Live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the code of conduct, conducting yourselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.’ That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi:  "bhikkhavo"ti.

"Bhadante"ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etadavoca: 


2"Sampannasīlā, bhikkhave, viharatha sampannapātimokkhā, pātimokkhasaṁvarasaṁvutā viharatha ācāragocarasampannā aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvino, samādāya sikkhatha sikkhāpadesu.

3Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘sabrahmacārīnaṁ piyo cassaṁ manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā’ti, sīlesvevassa paripūrakārī ajjhattaṁ cetosamathamanuyutto anirākatajjhāno vipassanāya samannāgato brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (1)

4Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘lābhī assaṁ cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkārānan’ti, sīlesvevassa paripūrakārī ajjhattaṁ cetosamathamanuyutto anirākatajjhāno vipassanāya samannāgato brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (2)

5Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘yesāhaṁ paribhuñjāmi cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkārānaṁ tesaṁ te kārā mahapphalā assu mahānisaṁsā’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (3)

6Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘ye me petā ñātī sālohitā kālaṅkatā pasannacittā anussaranti tesaṁ taṁ mahapphalaṁ assa mahānisaṁsan’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (4)

7Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘santuṭṭho assaṁ itarītaracīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkārenā’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (5)

8Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘khamo assaṁ sītassa uṇhassa jighacchāya pipāsāya ḍaṁsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassānaṁ, duruttānaṁ durāgatānaṁ vacanapathānaṁ uppannānaṁ sārīrikānaṁ vedanānaṁ dukkhānaṁ tibbānaṁ kharānaṁ kaṭukānaṁ asātānaṁ amanāpānaṁ pāṇaharānaṁ adhivāsakajātiko assan’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (6)

9Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘aratiratisaho assaṁ, na ca maṁ aratirati saheyya, uppannaṁ aratiratiṁ abhibhuyya abhibhuyya vihareyyan’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (7)

10Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘bhayabheravasaho assaṁ, na ca maṁ bhayabheravo saheyya, uppannaṁ bhayabheravaṁ abhibhuyya abhibhuyya vihareyyan’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (8)

11Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘catunnaṁ jhānānaṁ ābhicetasikānaṁ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṁ nikāmalābhī assaṁ akicchalābhī akasiralābhī’ti, sīlesvevassa … pe … brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (9)

12Ākaṅkheyya ce, bhikkhave, bhikkhu ‘āsavānaṁ khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyyan’ti, sīlesvevassa paripūrakārī ajjhattaṁ cetosamathamanuyutto anirākatajjhāno vipassanāya samannāgato brūhetā suññāgārānaṁ. (10)


13‘Sampannasīlā, bhikkhave, viharatha sampannapātimokkhā, pātimokkhasaṁvarasaṁvutā viharatha ācāragocarasampannā aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvino, samādāya sikkhatha sikkhāpadesū’ti, iti yaṁ taṁ vuttaṁ, idametaṁ paṭicca vuttan"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.71-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA105]] | A v 131 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN6]], [[MA105]], [[AN4.12]], [[ITI111]], [[AN10.17]], [[DN33]], [[DN34]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.28]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.71]]
> ◄  [[an10.70-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.72-sujato-pali]] ►
