---
sutta_code: "AN10.109"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.109]]
> ◄  [[an10.108-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.110-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XI. Perceptions for Ascetics — AN 10.109: Emetic
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, doctors prescribe an emetic for eliminating illnesses stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, and wind. There is such an emetic, I don’t deny it. But this kind of emetic sometimes works and sometimes fails.

2I will teach a noble emetic that works without fail. Relying on that emetic, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things. Listen and pay close attention, I will speak. …


3And what is that noble emetic that works without fail?


4For one of right view, wrong view is vomited up. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are vomited up. And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.


5For one of right thought, wrong thought is vomited up. … For one of right speech, wrong speech is vomited up. … For one of right action, wrong action is vomited up. … For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is vomited up. … For one of right effort, wrong effort is vomited up. … For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is vomited up. … For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is vomited up. … For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is vomited up. …

6For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is vomited up. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are vomited up. And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

This is the noble emetic that works without fail. Relying on this emetic, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things.”

1"Tikicchakā, bhikkhave, vamanaṁ denti pittasamuṭṭhānānampi ābādhānaṁ paṭighātāya, semhasamuṭṭhānānampi ābādhānaṁ paṭighātāya, vātasamuṭṭhānānampi ābādhānaṁ paṭighātāya. Atthetaṁ, bhikkhave, vamanaṁ; ‘netaṁ natthī’ti vadāmi. Tañca kho etaṁ, bhikkhave, vamanaṁ sampajjatipi vipajjatipi.

2Ahañca kho, bhikkhave, ariyaṁ vamanaṁ desessāmi, yaṁ vamanaṁ sampajjatiyeva no vipajjati, yaṁ vamanaṁ āgamma jātidhammā sattā jātiyā parimuccanti, jarādhammā sattā jarāya parimuccanti, maraṇadhammā sattā maraṇena parimuccanti, sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsadhammā sattā sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsehi parimuccanti. Taṁ suṇātha … pe … .


3Katamañca taṁ, bhikkhave, ariyaṁ vamanaṁ, yaṁ vamanaṁ sampajjatiyeva no vipajjati, yaṁ vamanaṁ āgamma jātidhammā sattā jātiyā parimuccanti … pe … sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsadhammā sattā sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsehi parimuccanti?


4Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi vantā hoti; ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa vantā honti; sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti.


5Sammāsaṅkappassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo vanto hoti … pe … sammāvācassa, bhikkhave, micchāvācā vantā hoti … sammākammantassa, bhikkhave, micchākammanto vanto hoti … sammāājīvassa, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo vanto hoti … sammāvāyāmassa, bhikkhave, micchāvāyāmo vanto hoti … sammāsatissa, bhikkhave, micchāsati vantā hoti … sammāsamādhissa, bhikkhave, micchāsamādhi vanto hoti … sammāñāṇissa, bhikkhave, micchāñāṇaṁ vantaṁ hoti … pe … .

6Sammāvimuttissa, bhikkhave, micchāvimutti vantā hoti; ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa vantā honti; sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti.

Idaṁ kho taṁ, bhikkhave, ariyaṁ vamanaṁ yaṁ vamanaṁ sampajjatiyeva no vipajjati, yaṁ vamanaṁ āgamma jātidhammā sattā jātiyā parimuccanti … pe … sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsehi parimuccantī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.109-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 219 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.109]]
> ◄  [[an10.108-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.110-sujato-pali]] ►
