---
sutta_code: "AN10.173"
sutta_title:
  - "Adhamma "
  - "Bad Principles"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.173]]
> ◄  [[an10.172-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.174-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XVII. With Jāṇussoṇī — AN 10.173: Bad Principles (3rd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, you should know bad principles and good principles. And you should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.

2So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad results? And what are good results?

Killing living creatures is a bad principle. Not killing living creatures is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by killing living creatures are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of not killing living creatures are good results.

3Stealing is a bad principle. Not stealing is a good principle. … Sexual misconduct is a bad principle. Avoiding sexual misconduct is a good principle. … Lying is a bad principle. Not lying is a good principle. … Divisive speech is a bad principle. Avoiding divisive speech is a good principle. … Harsh speech is a bad principle. Avoiding harsh speech is a good principle. … Talking nonsense is a bad principle. Avoiding talking nonsense is a good principle. … Covetousness is a bad principle. Contentment is a good principle. … Ill will is a bad principle. Good will is a good principle. …

4Wrong view is a bad principle. Right view is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view are good results.

5‘You should know bad principles and good principles. And you should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’ That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.”

1"Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabbaṁ.

2Katamo ca, bhikkhave, adhammo, katamo ca dhammo; katamo ca anattho, katamo ca attho?

Pāṇātipāto, bhikkhave, adhammo; pāṇātipātā veramaṇī dhammo; ye ca pāṇātipātapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; pāṇātipātā veramaṇipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho.

3Adinnādānaṁ, bhikkhave, adhammo; adinnādānā veramaṇī dhammo … kāmesumicchācāro, bhikkhave, adhammo; kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī dhammo … musāvādo, bhikkhave, adhammo; musāvādā veramaṇī dhammo … pisuṇā vācā, bhikkhave, adhammo; pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī dhammo … pharusā vācā, bhikkhave, adhammo; pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī dhammo … samphappalāpo, bhikkhave, adhammo; samphappalāpā veramaṇī dhammo … abhijjhā, bhikkhave, adhammo; anabhijjhā dhammo … byāpādo, bhikkhave, adhammo; abyāpādo dhammo … .

4Micchādiṭṭhi, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammādiṭṭhi dhammo; ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho.

5‘Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabban’ti, iti yaṁ taṁ vuttaṁ, idametaṁ paṭicca vuttan"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.173-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 260 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.173]]
> ◄  [[an10.172-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.174-sujato-pali]] ►
