---
sutta_code: "AN10.110"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.110]]
> ◄  [[an10.109-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.111-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XI. Perceptions for Ascetics — AN 10.110: Blown Away
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, these ten qualities should be blown away. What ten? For one of right view, wrong view is blown away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are blown away. And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

2For one of right thought, wrong thought is blown away. … For one of right speech, wrong speech is blown away. … For one of right action, wrong action is blown away. … For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is blown away. … For one of right effort, wrong effort is blown away. … For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is blown away. … For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is blown away. … For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is blown away. …

3For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is blown away. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are blown away. And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

These are the ten qualities that should be blown away.”

1"Dasayime, bhikkhave, niddhamanīyā dhammā. Katame dasa?

Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, micchādiṭṭhi niddhantā hoti; ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa niddhantā honti; sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti.

2Sammāsaṅkappassa, bhikkhave, micchāsaṅkappo niddhanto hoti … pe … sammāvācassa bhikkhave, micchāvācā niddhantā hoti … sammākammantassa, bhikkhave, micchākammanto niddhanto hoti … sammāājīvassa, bhikkhave, micchāājīvo niddhanto hoti … sammāvāyāmassa, bhikkhave, micchāvāyāmo niddhanto hoti … sammāsatissa, bhikkhave, micchāsati niddhantā hoti … sammāsamādhissa, bhikkhave, micchāsamādhi niddhanto hoti … sammāñāṇissa, bhikkhave, micchāñāṇaṁ niddhantaṁ hoti … .

3Sammāvimuttissa, bhikkhave, micchāvimutti niddhantā hoti; ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti te cassa niddhantā honti; sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti.

Ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa niddhamanīyā dhammā"ti.

Dasamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.110-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 220 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.110]]
> ◄  [[an10.109-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.111-sujato-pali]] ►
