---
sutta_code: "AN10.217"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṃsappanīya "
  - "Creepy Creatures"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.217]]
> ◄  [[an10.216-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.218-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XXI. The Body Born of Deeds — AN 10.217: Intentional (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I don’t say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

2Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

3And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action?

It’s when a certain person kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

4They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness.


5They commit sexual misconduct. They have sex with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They have sex with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal.


6These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action.


7And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action?

It’s when a certain person lies. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, mister, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

8They speak divisively. They repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote division.

9They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion.

10They indulge in talking nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and pointless.

11These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action.


12And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action?

It’s when someone is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’

13They have ill will and hateful intentions: ‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’


14They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no obligation to mother and father. No beings are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is well attained and practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’


15These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action.


16When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

17It’s like throwing loaded dice: they always fall the right side up. In the same way, when their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

18I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I don’t say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

19Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. There are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. There are three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result.


20And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action?

It’s when a certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of compassion for all living beings.

21They don’t steal. They don’t, with the intention to commit theft, take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness.


22They give up sexual misconduct. They don’t have sex with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don’t have sex with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal.


23These are the three kinds of successful bodily action.


24And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action?

It’s when a certain person gives up lying. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, mister, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ They don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

25They give up divisive speech. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

26They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people.

27They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.


28These are the four kinds of successful verbal action.


29And what are the three kinds of successful mental action?

It’s when someone is content. They don’t covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’

30They have a kind heart and loving intentions: ‘May these sentient beings live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!’


31They have right view, an undistorted perspective: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There is obligation to mother and father. There are beings reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are well attained and practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’


32These are the three kinds of successful mental action.


33When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result.


34It’s like throwing loaded dice: they always fall the right side up. In the same way, when their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result.

I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I don’t say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated.”

1"Nāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā byantībhāvaṁ vadāmi. Tañca kho diṭṭheva dhamme upapajje vā apare vā pariyāye. Na tvevāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā dukkhassantakiriyaṁ vadāmi.

2Tatra, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti; catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti; tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti.

3Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti?

Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātī hoti, luddo lohitapāṇi hatapahate niviṭṭho adayāpanno sabbapāṇabhūtesu. (1)

4Adinnādāyī hoti, yaṁ taṁ parassa paravittūpakaraṇaṁ gāmagataṁ vā araññagataṁ vā, taṁ adinnaṁ theyyasaṅkhātaṁ ādātā hoti. (2)


5Kāmesumicchācārī hoti, yā tā māturakkhitā … pe … antamaso mālāguḷaparikkhittāpi, tathārūpāsu cārittaṁ āpajjitā hoti. (3)


6Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti.


7Kathañca, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti?

Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco musāvādī hoti. Sabhaggato vā parisaggato vā ñātimajjhagato vā pūgamajjhagato vā rājakulamajjhagato vā abhinīto sakkhipuṭṭho ‘ehambho purisa, yaṁ jānāsi taṁ vadehī’ti, so ajānaṁ vā āha:  ‘jānāmī’ti, jānaṁ vā āha:  ‘Na jānāmī’ti, apassaṁ vā āha:  ‘passāmī’ti, passaṁ vā āha:  ‘Na passāmī’ti, iti attahetu vā parahetu vā āmisakiñcikkhahetu vā sampajānamusā bhāsitā hoti. (4)

8Pisuṇavāco hoti, ito sutvā amutra akkhātā imesaṁ bhedāya, amutra vā sutvā imesaṁ akkhātā amūsaṁ bhedāya. Iti samaggānaṁ vā bhettā bhinnānaṁ vā anuppadātā vaggārāmo vaggarato vagganandī, vaggakaraṇiṁ vācaṁ bhāsitā hoti. (5)

9Pharusavāco hoti, yā sā vācā aṇḍakā kakkasā parakaṭukā parābhisajjanī kodhasāmantā. Asamādhisaṁvattanikā, tathārūpiṁ vācaṁ bhāsitā hoti. (6)

10Samphappalāpī hoti, akālavādī abhūtavādī anatthavādī adhammavādī avinayavādī, anidhānavatiṁ vācaṁ bhāsitā hoti akālena anapadesaṁ apariyantavatiṁ anatthasaṁhitaṁ. (7)

11Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti.


12Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti?

Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco abhijjhālu hoti. Yaṁ taṁ parassa paravittūpakaraṇaṁ, taṁ abhijjhātā hoti:  ‘aho vata, yaṁ parassa taṁ mama assā’ti. (8)

13Byāpannacitto hoti, paduṭṭhamanasaṅkappo:  ‘ime sattā haññantu vā bajjhantu vā ucchijjantu vā vinassantu vā mā vā ahesun’ti. (9)


14Micchādiṭṭhiko hoti, viparītadassano:  ‘Natthi dinnaṁ … pe … ye imañca lokaṁ parañca lokaṁ sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti. (10)


15Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti.


16Tividhakāyakammantasandosabyāpattiakusalaakusalasañcetanikāsañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjanti; catubbidhavacīkammantasandosabyāpattiakusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjanti; tividhamanokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjanti.

17Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, apaṇṇako maṇi uddhaṅkhitto yena yeneva patiṭṭhāti suppatiṭṭhitaṁyeva patiṭṭhāti; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhakāyakammantasandosabyāpattiakusalaakusalasañcetanikāsañcetanikāhetu vā sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjanti; catubbidhavacīkammantasandosabyāpattiakusalasañcetanikāhetu vā sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjanti; tividhamanokammantasandosabyāpattiakusalaakusalasañcetanikāsañcetanikāhetu vā sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjantīti.

18Nāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā byantībhāvaṁ vadāmi, tañca kho diṭṭheva dhamme upapajje vā apare vā pariyāye. Na tvevāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā dukkhassantakiriyaṁ vadāmi.

19Tatra, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti; catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti; tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti.


20Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti?

Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco pāṇātipātā paṭivirato hoti nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho lajjī dayāpanno, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī viharati … pe … . (1)

21Adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, yaṁ taṁ parassa paravittūpakaraṇaṁ gāmagataṁ vā araññagataṁ vā, na taṁ adinnaṁ theyyasaṅkhātaṁ ādātā hoti. (2)


22Kāmesumicchācāraṁ pahāya, kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti. Yā tā māturakkhitā … pe … antamaso mālāguḷaparikkhittāpi, tathārūpāsu na cārittaṁ āpajjitā hoti. (3)


23Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti.


24Kathañca, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti?

Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco musāvādaṁ pahāya musāvādā paṭivirato hoti. Sabhaggato vā parisaggato vā ñātimajjhagato vā pūgamajjhagato vā rājakulamajjhagato vā abhinīto sakkhipuṭṭho ‘ehambho purisa, yaṁ jānāsi taṁ vadehī’ti, so ajānaṁ vā āha:  ‘Na jānāmī’ti, jānaṁ vā āha:  ‘jānāmī’ti, apassaṁ vā āha:  ‘Na passāmī’ti, passaṁ vā āha:  ‘passāmī’ti, iti attahetu vā parahetu vā āmisakiñcikkhahetu vā na sampajānamusā bhāsitā hoti. (4)

25Pisuṇaṁ vācaṁ pahāya, pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti – na ito sutvā amutra akkhātā imesaṁ bhedāya, amutra vā sutvā na imesaṁ akkhātā amūsaṁ bhedāya. Iti bhinnānaṁ vā sandhātā sahitānaṁ vā anuppadātā samaggārāmo samaggarato samagganandiṁ, samaggakaraṇiṁ vācaṁ bhāsitā hoti. (5)

26Pharusaṁ vācaṁ pahāya, pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti. Yā sā vācā nelā kaṇṇasukhā pemanīyā hadayaṅgamā porī bahujanakantā bahujanamanāpā, tathārūpiṁ vācaṁ bhāsitā hoti. (6)

27Samphappalāpaṁ pahāya, samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti kālavādī bhūtavādī atthavādī dhammavādī vinayavādī, nidhānavatiṁ vācaṁ bhāsitā hoti kālena sāpadesaṁ pariyantavatiṁ atthasaṁhitaṁ. (7)


28Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti.


29Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti?

Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco anabhijjhālu hoti. Yaṁ taṁ parassa paravittūpakaraṇaṁ taṁ anabhijjhātā hoti:  ‘aho vata, yaṁ parassa taṁ mamassā’ti. (8)

30Abyāpannacitto hoti appaduṭṭhamanasaṅkappo:  ‘ime sattā averā hontu abyāpajjā anīghā, sukhī attānaṁ pariharantū’ti. (9)


31Sammādiṭṭhiko hoti aviparītadassano:  ‘atthi dinnaṁ, atthi yiṭṭhaṁ … pe … ye imañca lokaṁ pa


32Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti.


33Tividhakāyakammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjanti; catubbidhavacīkammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjanti; tividhamanokammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjanti.


34Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, apaṇṇako maṇi uddhaṅkhitto yena yeneva patiṭṭhāti suppatiṭṭhitaṁyeva patiṭṭhāti; evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhakāyakammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjanti; catubbidhavacīkammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjanti; tividhamanokammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjanti.

Nāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā byantībhāvaṁ vadāmi. Tañca kho diṭṭheva dhamme upapajje vā apare vā pariyāye. Na tvevāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā dukkhassantakiriyaṁ vadāmī"ti. Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.217-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA48.1]], [[MA15]] | A v 292 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA15]], [[EA48.1]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.217]]
> ◄  [[an10.216-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.218-sujato-pali]] ►
