---
sutta_code: "AN10.23"
sutta_title:
  - "Kāya "
  - "Body"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.23]]
> ◄  [[an10.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.24-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### III. The Great Chapter — AN 10.23: Body
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are things that should be given up by the body, not by speech. There are things that should be given up by speech, not by the body. There are things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

2And what are the things that should be given up by the body, not by speech? It’s when a bhikkhu has committed a certain unskillful offense by way of body. After examination, sensible spiritual companions say this to them: ‘Venerable, you’ve committed a certain unskillful offense by way of body. Please give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good bodily conduct.’ When spoken to by their sensible spiritual companions they give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good bodily conduct. These are the things that should be given up by the body, not by speech.

3And what are the things that should be given up by speech, not by the body? It’s when a bhikkhu has committed a certain unskillful offense by way of speech. After examination, sensible spiritual companions say this to them: ‘Venerable, you’ve committed a certain unskillful offense by way of speech. Please give up that bad verbal conduct and develop good verbal conduct.’ When spoken to by their sensible spiritual companions they give up that bad verbal conduct and develop good verbal conduct. These are the things that should be given up by speech, not by the body.

4And what are the things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom? Greed … hate … delusion … anger … hostility … offensiveness … contempt … and stinginess are things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

5Nasty jealousy should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom. And what is nasty jealousy? It’s when a householder or their child is prospering in money, grain, silver, or gold. And a bondservant or dependent thinks: ‘Oh, may that householder or their child not prosper in money, grain, silver, or gold!’ Or an ascetic or brahmin receives robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And some other ascetic or brahmin thinks: ‘Oh, may that ascetic or brahmin not receive robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.’ This is called nasty jealousy.

6Corrupt wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom. And what are corrupt wishes? It’s when a faithless person wishes to be known as faithful. An unethical person wishes to be known as ethical. An uneducated person wishes to be known as learned. A lover of company wishes to be known as secluded. A lazy person wishes to be known as energetic. An unmindful person wishes to be known as mindful. A person without immersion wishes to be known as having immersion. A witless person wishes to be known as wise. A person who has not ended the defilements wishes to be known as having ended the defilements. These are called corrupt wishes. Corrupt wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

7Suppose that greed masters that bhikkhu and keeps going. Or that hate … delusion … anger … hostility … offensiveness … contempt … stinginess … nasty jealousy … or corrupt wishes master them and keep going. You should know of them: ‘This venerable does not have the understanding that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They don’t have the understanding that would eliminate hate … delusion … anger … hostility … offensiveness … contempt … stinginess … nasty jealousy … or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep going.’

8Suppose that greed does not master that bhikkhu and keep going. Or that hate … delusion … anger … hostility … offensiveness … contempt … stinginess … nasty jealousy … or corrupt wishes don’t master that bhikkhu and keep going. You should know of them: ‘This venerable has the understanding that eliminates greed, so greed doesn’t master them and keep going. They have the understanding that eliminates hate … delusion … anger … hostility … offensiveness … contempt … stinginess … nasty jealousy … and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don’t master them and keep going.’”

1"Atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā kāyena pahātabbā, no vācāya. Atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā vācāya pahātabbā, no kāyena. Atthi, bhikkhave, dhammā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā.

2Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā kāyena pahātabbā, no vācāya? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu akusalaṁ āpanno hoti kiñci desaṁ kāyena. Tamenaṁ anuvicca viññū sabrahmacārī evamāhaṁsu:  ‘āyasmā kho akusalaṁ āpanno kiñci desaṁ kāyena. Sādhu vatāyasmā kāyaduccaritaṁ pahāya kāyasucaritaṁ bhāvetū’ti. So anuvicca viññūhi sabrahmacārīhi vuccamāno kāyaduccaritaṁ pahāya kāyasucaritaṁ bhāveti. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā kāyena pahātabbā, no vācāya.

3Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā vācāya pahātabbā, no kāyena? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu akusalaṁ āpanno hoti kiñci desaṁ vācāya. Tamenaṁ anuvicca viññū sabrahmacārī evamāhaṁsu:  ‘āyasmā kho akusalaṁ āpanno kiñci desaṁ vācāya. Sādhu vatāyasmā vacīduccaritaṁ pahāya vacīsucaritaṁ bhāvetū’ti. So anuvicca viññūhi sabrahmacārīhi vuccamāno vacīduccaritaṁ pahāya vacīsucaritaṁ bhāveti. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā vācāya pahātabbā, no kāyena.

4Katame ca, bhikkhave, dhammā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā? Lobho, bhikkhave, neva kāyena pahātabbo no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbo. Doso, bhikkhave … pe … moho … kodho … upanāho … makkho … paḷāso … macchariyaṁ, bhikkhave, neva kāyena pahātabbaṁ no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbaṁ.

5Pāpikā, bhikkhave, issā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā. Katamā ca, bhikkhave, pāpikā issā? Idha, bhikkhave, ijjhati gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā dhanena vā dhaññena vā rajatena vā jātarūpena vā. Tatrāññatarassa dāsassa vā upavāsassa vā evaṁ hoti:  ‘aho vatimassa gahapatissa vā gahapatiputtassa vā na ijjheyya dhanena vā dhaññena vā rajatena vā jātarūpena vā’ti. Samaṇo vā pana brāhmaṇo vā lābhī hoti cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkārānaṁ. Tatrāññatarassa samaṇassa vā brāhmaṇassa vā evaṁ hoti:  ‘aho vata ayamāyasmā na lābhī assa cīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānapaccayabhesajjaparikkārānan’ti. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpikā issā.

6Pāpikā, bhikkhave, icchā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā. Katamā ca, bhikkhave, pāpikā icchā? Idha, bhikkhave, ekacco assaddho samāno ‘saddhoti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati; dussīlo samāno ‘sīlavāti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati; appassuto samāno ‘bahussutoti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati; saṅgaṇikārāmo samāno ‘pavivittoti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati; kusīto samāno ‘āraddhavīriyoti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati; muṭṭhassati samāno ‘upaṭṭhitassatīti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati; asamāhito samāno ‘samāhitoti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati; duppañño samāno ‘paññavāti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati; akhīṇāsavo samāno ‘khīṇāsavoti maṁ jāneyyun’ti icchati. Ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, pāpikā icchā. Ime vuccanti, bhikkhave, dhammā neva kāyena pahātabbā no vācāya, paññāya disvā pahātabbā.

7Tañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṁ lobho abhibhuyya iriyati, doso … moho … kodho … upanāho … makkho … paḷāso … macchariyaṁ … pāpikā issā … pāpikā icchā abhibhuyya iriyati. So evamassa veditabbo:  ‘nāyamāyasmā tathā pajānāti yathā pajānato lobho na hoti, tathāhimaṁ āyasmantaṁ lobho abhibhuyya iriyati; nāyamāyasmā tathā pajānāti yathā pajānato doso na hoti … moho … kodho … upanāho … makkho … paḷāso … macchariyaṁ … pāpikā issā … pāpikā icchā na hoti, tathāhimaṁ āyasmantaṁ pāpikā icchā abhibhuyya iriyatī’ti.

8Tañce, bhikkhave, bhikkhuṁ lobho nābhibhuyya iriyati, doso … moho … kodho … upanāho … makkho … paḷāso … macchariyaṁ … pāpikā issā … pāpikā icchā nābhibhuyya iriyati, so evamassa veditabbo:  ‘tathā ayamāyasmā pajānāti yathā pajānato lobho na hoti, tathāhimaṁ āyasmantaṁ lobho nābhibhuyya iriyati; tathā ayamāyasmā pajānāti yathā pajānato doso na hoti … moho … kodho … upanāho … makkho … paḷāso … macchariyaṁ … pāpikā issā … pāpikā icchā na hoti, tathāhimaṁ āyasmantaṁ pāpikā icchā nābhibhuyya iriyatī’"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 39 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN3]], [[MN15]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.23]]
> ◄  [[an10.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.24-sujato-pali]] ►
