---
sutta_code: "AN10.63"
sutta_title:
  - "Niṭṭhaṅgata "
  - "Come To A Conclusion"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.63]]
> ◄  [[an10.62-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.64-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### VII. Pairs — AN 10.63: Come to a Conclusion
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, all those who have come to a conclusion about me are accomplished in view. Of those who are accomplished in view, five conclude their path in this realm, and five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind. Which five conclude their path in this realm?

The one who has seven rebirths at most, the one who goes from family to family, the one-seeder, the once returner, and the one who is perfected in the present life. These five conclude their path in this realm.

Which five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind? The one who is extinguished between one life and the next, the one who is extinguished upon landing, the one who is extinguished without extra effort, the one who is extinguished with extra effort, and the one who heads upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. These five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind.

All those who have come to a conclusion about me are accomplished in view. Of those who are accomplished in view, these five conclude their path in this realm, and these five conclude their path after leaving this realm behind.”

1"Ye keci, bhikkhave, mayi niṭṭhaṁ gatā sabbe te diṭṭhisampannā. Tesaṁ diṭṭhisampannānaṁ pañcannaṁ idha niṭṭhā, pañcannaṁ idha vihāya niṭṭhā. Katamesaṁ pañcannaṁ idha niṭṭhā?

Sattakkhattuparamassa, kolaṅkolassa, ekabījissa, sakadāgāmissa, yo ca diṭṭheva dhamme arahā – imesaṁ pañcannaṁ idha niṭṭhā.

Katamesaṁ pañcannaṁ idha vihāya niṭṭhā? Antarāparinibbāyissa, upahaccaparinibbāyissa, asaṅkhāraparinibbāyissa, sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyissa, uddhaṁsotassa akaniṭṭhagāmino – imesaṁ pañcannaṁ idha vihāya niṭṭhā.

Ye keci, bhikkhave, mayi niṭṭhaṁ gatā, sabbe te diṭṭhisampannā. Tesaṁ diṭṭhisampannānaṁ imesaṁ pañcannaṁ idha niṭṭhā, imesaṁ pañcannaṁ idha vihāya niṭṭhā"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.63-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 119 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.63]]
> ◄  [[an10.62-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.64-sujato-pali]] ►
