---
sutta_code: "AN10.170"
sutta_title:
  - "Orima "
  - "Near Shore"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.170]]
> ◄  [[an10.169-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.171-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XVII. With Jāṇussoṇī — AN 10.170: The Near Shore
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the near shore and the far shore. Listen and pay close attention, I will speak. …

And what, bhikkhus, is the near shore? What is the far shore? Killing living creatures is the near shore, bhikkhus, and not killing living creatures is the far shore. Stealing is the near shore, and not stealing is the far shore. Sexual misconduct is the near shore, and avoiding sexual misconduct is the far shore. Lying is the near shore, and not lying is the far shore. Divisive speech is the near shore, and avoiding divisive speech is the far shore. Harsh speech is the near shore, and avoiding harsh speech is the far shore. Talking nonsense is the near shore, and avoiding talking nonsense is the far shore. Covetousness is the near shore, and contentment is the far shore. Ill will is the near shore, and good will is the far shore. Wrong view is the near shore, and right view is the far shore. This is the near shore, and this is the far shore.


2Few are those among humans  
who cross to the far shore.  
The rest just run  
around on the near shore.

3When the teaching is well explained,  
those who practice accordingly  
are the ones who will cross over  
Death’s domain so hard to pass.

4Rid of dark qualities,  
an astute person should develop the bright.  
Leaving home behind  
for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,

5you should try to find delight there,  
having left behind sensual pleasures.  
With no possessions, an astute person  
should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.

6And those whose minds are rightly developed  
in the awakening factors;  
letting go of attachments,  
they delight in not grasping.  
With defilements ended, brilliant,  
they are extinguished in this world.”

1"Orimañca, bhikkhave, tīraṁ desessāmi pārimañca tīraṁ. Taṁ suṇātha … pe …

… Katamañca, bhikkhave, orimaṁ tīraṁ, katamañca pārimaṁ tīraṁ? Pāṇātipāto, bhikkhave, orimaṁ tīraṁ, pāṇātipātā veramaṇī pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Adinnādānaṁ orimaṁ tīraṁ, adinnādānā veramaṇī pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Kāmesumicchācāro orimaṁ tīraṁ, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Musāvādo orimaṁ tīraṁ, musāvādā veramaṇī pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Pisuṇā vācā orimaṁ tīraṁ, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Pharusā vācā orimaṁ tīraṁ, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Samphappalāpo orimaṁ tīraṁ, samphappalāpā veramaṇī pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Abhijjhā orimaṁ tīraṁ, anabhijjhā pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Byāpādo orimaṁ tīraṁ, abyāpādo pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Micchādiṭṭhi orimaṁ tīraṁ, sammādiṭṭhi pārimaṁ tīraṁ. Idaṁ kho, bhikkhave, orimaṁ tīraṁ, idaṁ pārimaṁ tīranti.


2Appakā te manussesu,  
ye janā pāragāmino;  
Athāyaṁ itarā pajā,  
tīramevānudhāvati.

3Ye ca kho sammadakkhāte,  
dhamme dhammānuvattino;  
Te janā pāramessanti,  
maccudheyyaṁ suduttaraṁ.

4Kaṇhaṁ dhammaṁ vippahāya,  
sukkaṁ bhāvetha paṇḍito;  
Okā anokamāgamma,  
viveke yattha dūramaṁ.

5Tatrābhiratimiccheyya,  
hitvā kāme akiñcano;  
Pariyodapeyya attānaṁ,  
cittaklesehi paṇḍito.

6Yesaṁ sambodhiyaṅgesu,  
sammā cittaṁ subhāvitaṁ;  
Ādānapaṭinissagge,  
anupādāya ye ratā;  
Khīṇāsavā jutimanto,  
te loke parinibbutā"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.170-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA1051]] | A v 253 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA1051]], [[DHP\|DHP85]], [[AN10.117]], [[AN10.118]], [[AN10.169]], [[SN45.34]], [[SN46.17]], [[DHP\|DHP86]], [[DHP\|DHP87]], [[DHP\|DHP88]], [[DHP\|DHP89]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.170]]
> ◄  [[an10.169-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.171-sujato-pali]] ►
