---
sutta_code: "AN10.66"
sutta_title:
  - "Sukha "
  - "Happiness"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.66]]
> ◄  [[an10.65-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.67-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### VII. Pairs — AN 10.66: Happiness (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying in the land of the Magadhans near the little village of Nālaka. Then the wanderer Sāmaṇḍakāni went up to Venerable Sāriputta and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, Sāmaṇḍakāni sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta:

2“Reverend Sāriputta, in this teaching and training, what is happiness and what is suffering?”

“Reverend, in this teaching and training dissatisfaction is suffering and satisfaction is happiness. When you’re dissatisfied, you can expect this kind of suffering. You find no happiness or pleasure while walking … standing … sitting … or lying down … or when in a village … a wilderness … at the root of a tree … an empty hut … the open air … or when among the bhikkhus. When you’re dissatisfied, this is the kind of suffering you can expect.

3When you’re satisfied, you can expect this kind of happiness. You find happiness or pleasure while walking … standing … sitting … or lying down … or when in a village … a wilderness … at the root of a tree … an empty hut … the open air … or when among the bhikkhus. When you’re satisfied, this is the kind of happiness you can expect.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ āyasmā sāriputto magadhesu viharati nālakagāmake. Atha kho sāmaṇḍakāni paribbājako yenāyasmā sāriputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmatā sāriputtena saddhiṁ sammodi. Sammodanīyaṁ kathaṁ sāraṇīyaṁ vītisāretvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho sāmaṇḍakāni paribbājako āyasmantaṁ sāriputtaṁ etadavoca: 

2"Kiṁ nu kho, āvuso, sāriputta, imasmiṁ dhammavinaye sukhaṁ, kiṁ dukkhan"ti?

"Anabhirati kho, āvuso, imasmiṁ dhammavinaye dukkhā, abhirati sukhā. Anabhiratiyā, āvuso, sati idaṁ dukkhaṁ pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – gacchantopi sukhaṁ sātaṁ nādhigacchati, ṭhitopi … nisinnopi … sayānopi … gāmagatopi … araññagatopi … rukkhamūlagatopi … suññāgāragatopi … abbhokāsagatopi … bhikkhumajjhagatopi sukhaṁ sātaṁ nādhigacchati. Anabhiratiyā, āvuso, sati idaṁ dukkhaṁ pāṭikaṅkhaṁ.

3Abhiratiyā, āvuso, sati idaṁ sukhaṁ pāṭikaṅkhaṁ – gacchantopi sukhaṁ sātaṁ adhigacchati, ṭhitopi … nisinnopi … sayānopi … gāmagatopi … araññagatopi … rukkhamūlagatopi … suññāgāragatopi … abbhokāsagatopi … bhikkhumajjhagatopi sukhaṁ sātaṁ adhigacchati. Abhiratiyā, āvuso, sati idaṁ sukhaṁ pāṭikaṅkhan"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.66-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 121 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.66]]
> ◄  [[an10.65-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.67-sujato-pali]] ►
