---
sutta_code: "AN10.45"
sutta_title:
  - "Rājantepurappavesana "
  - "Royal Harem"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.45]]
> ◄  [[an10.44-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.46-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### V. Abuse — AN 10.45: Entering a Royal Harem
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are ten drawbacks to entering a royal harem. What ten?

Firstly, a king is sitting with his chief queen when a bhikkhu enters. When the queen sees the bhikkhu she smiles, or when the bhikkhu sees the queen he smiles. So the king thinks: ‘They’ve done it for sure, or they will do it.’ This is the first drawback of entering a royal harem.

2Furthermore, a king has many duties, and much to do. He has sex with one of the women but doesn’t remember. She gets pregnant from that. So the king thinks: ‘No-one else has entered here, except for that bhikkhu. Could this be the bhikkhu’s doing?’ This is the second drawback of entering a royal harem.

3Furthermore, a gem is lost somewhere in the royal harem. So the king thinks: ‘No-one else has entered here, except for that bhikkhu. Could this be the bhikkhu’s doing?’ This is the third drawback of entering a royal harem.

4Furthermore, secret deliberations in the royal harem are leaked outside. So the king thinks: ‘No-one else has entered here, except for that bhikkhu. Could this be the bhikkhu’s doing?’ This is the fourth drawback of entering a royal harem.

5Furthermore, in a royal harem, a father longs for their son, or a son longs for his father. They think: ‘No-one else has entered here, except for that bhikkhu. Could this be the bhikkhu’s doing?’ This is the fifth drawback of entering a royal harem.

6Furthermore, the king promotes someone to a higher position. Those who are upset by this think: ‘The king is close to that bhikkhu. Could this be the bhikkhu’s doing?’ This is the sixth drawback of entering a royal harem.

7Furthermore, the king demotes someone to a lower position. Those who are upset by this think: ‘The king is close to that bhikkhu. Could this be the bhikkhu’s doing?’ This is the seventh drawback of entering a royal harem.

8Furthermore, the king dispatches the army at the wrong time. Those who are upset by this think: ‘The king is close to that bhikkhu. Could this be the bhikkhu’s doing?’ This is the eighth drawback of entering a royal harem.

9Furthermore, the king dispatches the army at the right time, but orders it to turn back while still on the road. Those who are upset by this think: ‘The king is close to that bhikkhu. Could this be the bhikkhu’s doing?’ This is the ninth drawback of entering a royal harem.

10Furthermore, in the royal harem there is a trampling of elephants, horses, and chariots, as well as arousing sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches that do not befit a bhikkhu. This is the tenth drawback of entering a royal harem.

These are the ten drawbacks of entering a royal harem.”

1"Dasayime, bhikkhave, ādīnavā rājantepurappavesane. Katame dasa?

Idha, bhikkhave, rājā mahesiyā saddhiṁ nisinno hoti. Tatra bhikkhu pavisati. Mahesī vā bhikkhuṁ disvā sitaṁ pātukaroti, bhikkhu vā mahesiṁ disvā sitaṁ pātukaroti. Tattha rañño evaṁ hoti:  ‘addhā imesaṁ kataṁ vā karissanti vā’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, paṭhamo ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (1)

2Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rājā bahukicco bahukaraṇīyo aññataraṁ itthiṁ gantvā na sarati:  ‘sā tena gabbhaṁ gaṇhāti’. Tattha rañño evaṁ hoti:  ‘Na kho idha añño koci pavisati, aññatra pabbajitena. Siyā nu kho pabbajitassa kamman’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, dutiyo ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (2)

3Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rañño antepure aññataraṁ ratanaṁ nassati. Tattha rañño evaṁ hoti:  ‘Na kho idha añño koci pavisati, aññatra pabbajitena. Siyā nu kho pabbajitassa kamman’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, tatiyo ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (3)

4Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rañño antepure abbhantarā guyhamantā bahiddhā sambhedaṁ gacchanti. Tattha rañño evaṁ hoti:  ‘Na kho idha añño koci pavisati, aññatra pabbajitena. Siyā nu kho pabbajitassa kamman’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, catuttho ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (4)

5Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rañño antepure pitā vā puttaṁ pattheti putto vā pitaraṁ pattheti. Tesaṁ evaṁ hoti:  ‘Na kho idha añño koci pavisati, aññatra pabbajitena. Siyā nu kho pabbajitassa kamman’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, pañcamo ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (5)

6Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rājā nīcaṭṭhāniyaṁ ucce ṭhāne ṭhapeti. Yesaṁ taṁ amanāpaṁ tesaṁ evaṁ hoti:  ‘rājā kho pabbajitena saṁsaṭṭho. Siyā nu kho pabbajitassa kamman’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, chaṭṭho ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (6)

7Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rājā uccaṭṭhāniyaṁ nīce ṭhāne ṭhapeti. Yesaṁ taṁ amanāpaṁ tesaṁ evaṁ hoti:  ‘rājā kho pabbajitena saṁsaṭṭho. Siyā nu kho pabbajitassa kamman’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, sattamo ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (7)

8Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rājā akāle senaṁ uyyojeti. Yesaṁ taṁ amanāpaṁ tesaṁ evaṁ hoti:  ‘rājā kho pabbajitena saṁsaṭṭho. Siyā nu kho pabbajitassa kamman’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, aṭṭhamo ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (8)

9Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rājā kāle senaṁ uyyojetvā antarāmaggato nivattāpeti. Yesaṁ taṁ amanāpaṁ tesaṁ evaṁ hoti:  ‘rājā kho pabbajitena saṁsaṭṭho. Siyā nu kho pabbajitassa kamman’ti. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, navamo ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane. (9)

10Puna caparaṁ, bhikkhave, rañño antepuraṁ hatthisammaddaṁ assasammaddaṁ rathasammaddaṁ rajanīyāni rūpasaddagandharasaphoṭṭhabbāni, yāni na pabbajitassa sāruppāni. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, dasamo ādīnavo rājantepurappavesane.

Ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa ādīnavā rājantepurappavesane"ti. (10)

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.45-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA46.6]] | A v 81 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PC83]], [[EA46.6]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.45]]
> ◄  [[an10.44-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.46-sujato-pali]] ►
