---
sutta_code: "AN10.114"
sutta_title:
  - "Adhamma "
  - "Bad Principles"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.114]]
> ◄  [[an10.113-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.115-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XII. The Ceremony of Descent — AN 10.114: Bad Principles (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, you should know bad principles and good principles. And you should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.

2So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad results? And what are good results?

3Wrong view is a bad principle. Right view is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view are good results.

4Wrong thought is a bad principle. Right thought is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong thought are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right thought are good results.

5Wrong speech is a bad principle. Right speech is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong speech are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right speech are good results.

6Wrong action is a bad principle. Right action is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong action are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right action are good results.

7Wrong livelihood is a bad principle. Right livelihood is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong livelihood are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right livelihood are good results.

8Wrong effort is a bad principle. Right effort is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong effort are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right effort are good results.

9Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle. Right mindfulness is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong mindfulness are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right mindfulness are good results.

10Wrong immersion is a bad principle. Right immersion is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong immersion are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right immersion are good results.

11Wrong knowledge is a bad principle. Right knowledge is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong knowledge are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right knowledge are good results.

12Wrong freedom is a bad principle. Right freedom is a good principle. And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are bad results. And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right freedom are good results.

13‘You should know bad principles and good principles. And you should know bad results and good results. Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’ That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.”

1"Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabbaṁ.

2Katamo ca, bhikkhave, adhammo, katamo ca dhammo, katamo ca anattho, katamo ca attho?

3Micchādiṭṭhi, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammādiṭṭhi dhammo; ye ca micchādiṭṭhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (1)

4Micchāsaṅkappo, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammāsaṅkappo dhammo; ye ca micchāsaṅkappapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammāsaṅkappapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (2)

5Micchāvācā, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammāvācā dhammo; ye ca micchāvācāpaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammāvācāpaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (3)

6Micchākammanto, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammākammanto dhammo; ye ca micchākammantapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammākammantapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (4)

7Micchāājīvo, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammāājīvo dhammo; ye ca micchāājīvapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammāājīvapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (5)

8Micchāvāyāmo, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammāvāyāmo dhammo; ye ca micchāvāyāmapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammāvāyāmapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (6)

9Micchāsati, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammāsati dhammo; ye ca micchāsatipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammāsatipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (7)

10Micchāsamādhi, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammāsamādhi dhammo; ye ca micchāsamādhipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammāsamādhipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (8)

11Micchāñāṇaṁ, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammāñāṇaṁ dhammo; ye ca micchāñāṇapaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammāñāṇapaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (9)

12Micchāvimutti, bhikkhave, adhammo; sammāvimutti dhammo; ye ca micchāvimuttipaccayā aneke pāpakā akusalā dhammā sambhavanti, ayaṁ anattho; sammāvimuttipaccayā ca aneke kusalā dhammā bhāvanāpāripūriṁ gacchanti, ayaṁ attho. (10)

13‘Adhammo ca, bhikkhave, veditabbo dhammo ca; anattho ca veditabbo attho ca. Adhammañca viditvā dhammañca, anatthañca viditvā atthañca yathā dhammo yathā attho tathā paṭipajjitabban’ti, iti yaṁ taṁ vuttaṁ, idametaṁ paṭicca vuttan"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.114-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 223 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.114]]
> ◄  [[an10.113-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.115-sujato-pali]] ►
