---
sutta_code: "AN10.32"
sutta_title:
  - "Pātimokkhaṭṭhapanā "
  - "Suspending The Recitation Of The Monastic Code"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.32]]
> ◄  [[an10.31-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.33-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### IV. With Upāli — AN 10.32: Suspending the Recitation of the Monastic Code
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“Sir, how many grounds are there to suspend the recitation of the monastic code?”

“Upāli, there are ten grounds to suspend the recitation of the monastic code. What ten? A bhikkhu who has committed an expulsion offense is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone has committed an expulsion offense is unfinished. A person who is not fully ordained is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone is fully ordained or not is unfinished. Someone who has rejected the training is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone has rejected the training or not is unfinished. A eunuch is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone is a eunuch is unfinished. A raper of nuns is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether or not someone is a raper of nuns is unfinished. These are the ten grounds to suspend the recitation of the monastic code.”

1"Kati nu kho, bhante, pātimokkhaṭṭhapanā"ti?

"Dasa kho, upāli, pātimokkhaṭṭhapanā. Katame dasa? Pārājiko tassaṁ parisāyaṁ nisinno hoti, pārājikakathā vippakatā hoti, anupasampanno tassaṁ parisāyaṁ nisinno hoti, anupasampannakathā vippakatā hoti, sikkhaṁ paccakkhātako tassaṁ parisāyaṁ nisinno hoti, sikkhaṁ paccakkhātakakathā vippakatā hoti, paṇḍako tassaṁ parisāyaṁ nisinno hoti, paṇḍakakathā vippakatā hoti, bhikkhunidūsako tassaṁ parisāyaṁ nisinno hoti, bhikkhunidūsakakathā vippakatā hoti – ime kho, upāli, dasa pātimokkhaṭṭhapanā"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.32-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 70 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.32]]
> ◄  [[an10.31-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.33-sujato-pali]] ►
