---
sutta_code: "AN10.37"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṃghabheda "
  - "Schism In The Saṅgha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.37]]
> ◄  [[an10.36-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.38-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### IV. With Upāli — AN 10.37: Schism in the Saṅgha
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“Sir, they speak of ‘schism in the Saṅgha’. How is schism in the Saṅgha defined?”

“Upāli, it’s when a bhikkhu explains what is not the teaching as the teaching, and what is the teaching as not the teaching. They explain what is not the training as the training, and what is the training as not the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One. On these ten grounds they split off and go their own way. They perform legal acts autonomously and recite the monastic code autonomously.

That is how schism in the Saṅgha is defined.”

1"‘Saṅghabhedo, saṅghabhedo’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, saṅgho bhinno hotī"ti?

"Idhupāli, bhikkhū adhammaṁ dhammoti dīpenti, dhammaṁ adhammoti dīpenti, avinayaṁ vinayoti dīpenti, vinayaṁ avinayoti dīpenti, abhāsitaṁ alapitaṁ tathāgatena bhāsitaṁ lapitaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, bhāsitaṁ lapitaṁ tathāgatena abhāsitaṁ alapitaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, anāciṇṇaṁ tathāgatena āciṇṇaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, āciṇṇaṁ tathāgatena anāciṇṇaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, apaññattaṁ tathāgatena paññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, paññattaṁ tathāgatena apaññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti. Te imehi dasahi vatthūhi avakassanti apakassanti āveni kammāni karonti āveni pātimokkhaṁ uddisanti.

Ettāvatā kho, upāli, saṅgho bhinno hotī"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.37-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 73 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[PLI-TV-KD17]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.37]]
> ◄  [[an10.36-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.38-sujato-pali]] ►
