---
sutta_code: "AN10.74"
sutta_title:
  - "Vaḍḍhi "
  - "Growth"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.74]]
> ◄  [[an10.73-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.75-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### VIII. If You Want — AN 10.74: Growth
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, a noble disciple who grows in ten ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. What ten? He grows in fields and lands, money and grain, wives and children, in bondservants, workers, and staff, and in livestock. And he grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. A noble disciple who grows in ten ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life.


2Someone who grows in money and grain,  
in wives, children, and livestock,  
is wealthy, famous, and respected  
by relatives and friends, and even by royals.

3When someone grows in faith and ethics,  
wisdom, and both generosity and learning—  
a good man such as he sees clearly,  
and in the present life he grows in both ways.”

1"Dasahi, bhikkhave, vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhamāno ariyasāvako ariyāya vaḍḍhiyā vaḍḍhati, sārādāyī ca hoti varādāyī kāyassa. Katamehi dasahi? Khettavatthūhi vaḍḍhati, dhanadhaññena vaḍḍhati, puttadārehi vaḍḍhati, dāsakammakaraporisehi vaḍḍhati, catuppadehi vaḍḍhati, saddhāya vaḍḍhati, sīlena vaḍḍhati, sutena vaḍḍhati, cāgena vaḍḍhati, paññāya vaḍḍhati – imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi vaḍḍhīhi vaḍḍhamāno ariyasāvako ariyāya vaḍḍhiyā vaḍḍhati, sārādāyī ca hoti varādāyī kāyassāti.


2Dhanena dhaññena ca yodha vaḍḍhati,  
Puttehi dārehi catuppadehi ca;  
Sa bhogavā hoti yasassi pūjito,  
Ñātīhi mittehi athopi rājubhi.

3Saddhāya sīlena ca yodha vaḍḍhati,  
Paññāya cāgena sutena cūbhayaṁ;  
So tādiso sappuriso vicakkhaṇo,  
Diṭṭheva dhamme ubhayena vaḍḍhatī"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.74-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 137 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN5.63]], [[AN5.64]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.74]]
> ◄  [[an10.73-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.75-sujato-pali]] ►
