---
sutta_code: "AN10.148"
sutta_title:
  - "Ariyamagga "
  - "Noble Path"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.148]]
> ◄  [[an10.147-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.149-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya – The Numerical Discourses

## 1: The Book of the Ones

### XV. The Noble Path — AN 10.148: The Teaching of the Good Persons
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you the teaching of the good persons and the teaching of the bad persons. … And what is the teaching of the bad persons? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is the teaching of the bad persons. And what is the teaching of the good persons? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is the teaching of the good persons.”

1“Sappurisadhammañca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi asappurisadhammañca. Taṁ suṇātha …pe… katamo ca, bhikkhave, asappurisadhammo? Micchādiṭṭhi …pe… micchāvimutti—ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, asappurisadhammo. Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sappurisadhammo? Sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāvimutti—ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sappurisadhammo”ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.148-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 245 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.148]]
> ◄  [[an10.147-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.149-sujato-pali]] ►
