---
sutta_code: "AN10.42"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṃghabheda "
  - "Schism In The Saṅgha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.42]]
> ◄  [[an10.41-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.43-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### V. Abuse — AN 10.42: Roots of Arguments (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“Sir, how many roots of arguments are there?”

“Upāli, there are ten roots of arguments. What ten? It’s when a bhikkhu explains what is not the teaching as the teaching, and what is the teaching as not the teaching. They explain what is not the training as the training, and what is the training as not the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One.

These are the ten roots of arguments.”

1"Kati nu kho, bhante, vivādamūlānī"ti?

"Dasa kho, upāli, vivādamūlāni. Katamāni dasa? Idhupāli, bhikkhū adhammaṁ dhammoti dīpenti, dhammaṁ adhammoti dīpenti, avinayaṁ vinayoti dīpenti, vinayaṁ avinayoti dīpenti, abhāsitaṁ alapitaṁ tathāgatena bhāsitaṁ lapitaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, bhāsitaṁ lapitaṁ tathāgatena abhāsitaṁ alapitaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, anāciṇṇaṁ tathāgatena āciṇṇaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, āciṇṇaṁ tathāgatena anāciṇṇaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, apaññattaṁ tathāgatena paññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti, paññattaṁ tathāgatena apaññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti.

Imāni kho, upāli, dasa vivādamūlānī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.42-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 78 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.42]]
> ◄  [[an10.41-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.43-sujato-pali]] ►
