---
sutta_code: "AN10.8"
sutta_title:
  - "Jhāna "
  - "Inspiring All Around:"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.8]]
> ◄  [[an10.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.9-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### I. Benefits — AN 10.8: Inspiring All Around: the jhānas
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“Mendicants, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they’re incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: ‘How can I become faithful and ethical?’ When the mendicant is faithful and ethical, they’re complete in that respect.

2A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not educated. … they’re not a Dhamma speaker … they don’t frequent assemblies … they don’t teach Dhamma to the assembly with assurance … they’re not an expert in the training … they don’t stay in the wilderness, in remote lodgings … they don’t get the four jhānas — blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind — when they want, without trouble or difficulty … they don’t realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

So they’re incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: ‘How can I become faithful, ethical, and educated, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the four jhānas when they want, and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements?’


3When they’re faithful, ethical, and educated, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the four jhānas when they want, and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements, they’re complete in that respect.

A mendicant who has these ten qualities is inspiring all around, and is complete in every respect.”

1"Saddho ca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu hoti, no ca sīlavā; evaṁ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti. Tena taṁ aṅgaṁ paripūretabbaṁ:  ‘kintāhaṁ saddho ca assaṁ, sīlavā cā’ti. Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti sīlavā ca, evaṁ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti.

2Saddho ca, bhikkhave, bhikkhu hoti sīlavā ca, no ca bahussuto … pe … bahussuto ca, no ca dhammakathiko … dhammakathiko ca, no ca parisāvacaro … parisāvacaro ca, no ca visārado parisāya dhammaṁ deseti … visārado ca parisāya dhammaṁ deseti, no ca vinayadharo … vinayadharo ca, no ca āraññiko pantasenāsano … āraññiko ca pantasenāsano, no ca catunnaṁ jhānānaṁ ābhicetasikānaṁ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṁ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī … catunnañca jhānānaṁ ābhicetasikānaṁ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṁ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, no ca āsavānaṁ khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati.

Evaṁ so tenaṅgena aparipūro hoti. Tena taṁ aṅgaṁ paripūretabbaṁ:  ‘kintāhaṁ saddho ca assaṁ, sīlavā ca, bahussuto ca, dhammakathiko ca, parisāvacaro ca, visārado ca parisāya dhammaṁ deseyyaṁ, vinayadharo ca, āraññiko ca pantasenāsano, catunnañca jhānānaṁ ābhicetasikānaṁ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṁ nikāmalābhī assaṁ akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, āsavānañca khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihareyyan’ti.


3Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddho ca hoti, sīlavā ca, bahussuto ca, dhammakathiko ca, parisāvacaro ca, visārado ca parisāya dhammaṁ deseti, vinayadharo ca, āraññiko ca pantasenāsano, catunnañca jhānānaṁ ābhicetasikānaṁ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṁ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, āsavānañca khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati; evaṁ so tenaṅgena paripūro hoti.

Imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu samantapāsādiko ca hoti sabbākāraparipūro cā"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.8-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 10 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN8.71]], [[AN9.4]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.8]]
> ◄  [[an10.7-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.9-sujato-pali]] ►
