---
sutta_code: "AN10.39"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṃghabheda "
  - "Schism In The Saṅgha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.39]]
> ◄  [[an10.38-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.40-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### IV. With Upāli — AN 10.39: With Ānanda (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

“Sir, they speak of ‘schism in the Saṅgha’. How is schism in the Saṅgha defined?”

“Ānanda, it’s when a bhikkhu explains what is not the teaching as the teaching … and what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One. On these ten grounds they split off and go their own way. They perform legal acts autonomously and recite the monastic code autonomously. That is how schism in the Saṅgha is defined.”


2“But sir, what does someone who has caused a schism in a harmonious Saṅgha bring upon themselves?”

“They bring upon themselves evil that lasts for an eon.”

“But sir, what is the evil that lasts for an eon?”

“They burn in hell for an eon, Ānanda.


3A schismatic remains for the eon  
in a place of loss, in hell.  
Basing themselves in what is not the teaching,  
favoring factions, they destroy their sanctuary.  
After causing schism in a harmonious Saṅgha,  
they burn in hell for an eon.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 

"‘Saṅghabhedo saṅghabhedo’ti, bhante, vuccati. Kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, saṅgho bhinno hotī"ti?

"Idhānanda, bhikkhū adhammaṁ dhammoti dīpenti, dhammaṁ adhammoti dīpenti, avinayaṁ vinayoti dīpenti … pe … paññattaṁ tathāgatena apaññattaṁ tathāgatenāti dīpenti. Te imehi dasahi vatthūhi avakassanti apakassanti āveni kammāni karonti āveni pātimokkhaṁ uddisanti. Ettāvatā kho, ānanda, saṅgho bhinno hotī"ti.


2"Samaggaṁ pana, bhante, saṅghaṁ bhinditvā kiṁ so pasavatī"ti?

"Kappaṭṭhikaṁ, ānanda, kibbisaṁ pasavatī"ti.

"Kiṁ pana, bhante, kappaṭṭhikaṁ kibbisan"ti?

"Kappaṁ, ānanda, nirayamhi paccatīti – 


3 Āpāyiko nerayiko,  
Kappaṭṭho saṅghabhedako;  
Vaggarato adhammaṭṭho,  
Yogakkhemā padhaṁsati;  
Saṅghaṁ samaggaṁ bhinditvā,  
Kappaṁ nirayamhi paccatī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.39-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 75 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[ITI18]], [[PLI-TV-KD17]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.39]]
> ◄  [[an10.38-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.40-sujato-pali]] ►
