---
sutta_code: "AN10.19"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyaariyāvāsa "
  - "Abodes Of The Noble Ones"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.19]]
> ◄  [[an10.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.20-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### II. A Protector — AN 10.19: Abodes of the Noble Ones (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“There are these ten noble abodes in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide. What ten?

A bhikkhu has given up five factors, is endowed with six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has pure intentions, has stilled the physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom. These are the ten noble abodes in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide.”

1"Dasayime, bhikkhave, ariyāvāsā, ye ariyā āvasiṁsu vā āvasanti vā āvasissanti vā. Katame dasa?

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu pañcaṅgavippahīno hoti, chaḷaṅgasamannāgato, ekārakkho, caturāpasseno, paṇunnapaccekasacco, samavayasaṭṭhesano, anāvilasaṅkappo, passaddhakāyasaṅkhāro, suvimuttacitto, suvimuttapañño. Ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa ariyāvāsā, ye ariyā āvasiṁsu vā āvasanti vā āvasissanti vā"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 29 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DN33]], [[DN34]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.28]], [[ITI54]], [[ITI55]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.19]]
> ◄  [[an10.18-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.20-sujato-pali]] ►
