---
sutta_code: "AN10.122"
sutta_title:
  - "Paccorohaṇī "
  - "Ceremony Of Descent"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.122]]
> ◄  [[an10.121-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.123-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XII. The Ceremony of Descent — AN 10.122: The Ending of Defilements
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, these ten things, when developed and cultivated, lead to the ending of defilements. What ten? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These ten things, when developed and cultivated, lead to the ending of defilements.”

1"Dasayime, bhikkhave, dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattanti. Katame dasa? Sammādiṭṭhi, sammāsaṅkappo, sammāvācā, sammākammanto, sammāājīvo, sammāvāyāmo, sammāsati, sammāsamādhi, sammāñāṇaṁ, sammāvimutti – ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattantī"ti.

Dasamaṁ.

Paccorohaṇivaggo dutiyo.

2Tayo adhammā ajito,  
Saṅgāravo ca orimaṁ;  
Dve ceva paccorohaṇī,  
Pubbaṅgamaṁ āsavakkhayoti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.122-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 237 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.122]]
> ◄  [[an10.121-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.123-sujato-pali]] ►
