---
sutta_code: "AN10.98"
sutta_title:
  - "Thera "
  - "Senior bhikkhu"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.98]]
> ◄  [[an10.97-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.99-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### X. With Upāli — AN 10.98: A Senior bhikkhu
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, a senior bhikkhu with ten qualities lives comfortably in whatever region they live. What ten?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They’re ethical, restrained in the code of conduct, with good behavior and supporters. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken.

They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically.

Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well judged in both the rules and accompanying material.

They’re skilled in raising and settling disciplinary issues.

They love the teachings and are a delight to converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training.

They’re content with any kind of robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

They look impressive when going out and coming back, and are well restrained when sitting in an inhabited area.

They get the four jhānas — blissful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind — when they want, without trouble or difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

A senior bhikkhu with these ten qualities lives comfortably in whatever region they live.”

1"Dasahi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu yassaṁ yassaṁ disāyaṁ viharati, phāsuyeva viharati. Katamehi dasahi?

Thero hoti rattaññū cirapabbajito, sīlavā hoti … pe … samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu, bahussuto hoti … pe … diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdho, ubhayāni kho panassa pātimokkhāni vitthārena svāgatāni honti suvibhattāni suppavattīni suvinicchitāni suttaso anubyañjanaso, adhikaraṇasamuppādavūpasamakusalo hoti, dhammakāmo hoti piyasamudāhāro abhidhamme abhivinaye uḷārapāmojjo, santuṭṭho hoti itarītaracīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena, pāsādiko hoti abhikkantapaṭikkante susaṁvuto antaraghare nisajjāya, catunnaṁ jhānānaṁ ābhicetasikānaṁ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṁ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, āsavānañca khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati.

Imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu yassaṁ yassaṁ disāyaṁ viharati, phāsuyeva viharatī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.98-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 201 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.98]]
> ◄  [[an10.97-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.99-sujato-pali]] ►
