---
sutta_code: "AN10.178"
sutta_title:
  - "Sādhu "
  - "Good"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.178]]
> ◄  [[an10.177-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.179-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XVIII. Good — AN 10.178: Good
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you what is good and what is not good. Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.”

“Yes, sir,” they replied. The Buddha said this:

2“And what, bhikkhus, is not good? Killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view. This is called what is not good.

3And what is good? Avoiding killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; avoiding speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment, good will, and right view. This is called what is good.”

1"Sādhuñca vo, bhikkhave, desessāmi asādhuñca. Taṁ suṇātha, sādhukaṁ manasi karotha, bhāsissāmī"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti kho te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etadavoca: 

2"Katamañca, bhikkhave, asādhu? Pāṇātipāto, adinnādānaṁ, kāmesumicchācāro, musāvādo, pisuṇā vācā, pharusā vācā, samphappalāpo, abhijjhā, byāpādo, micchādiṭṭhi – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, asādhu.

3Katamañca, bhikkhave, sādhu? Pāṇātipātā veramaṇī, adinnādānā veramaṇī, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī, musāvādā veramaṇī, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī, samphappalāpā veramaṇī, anabhijjhā, abyāpādo, sammādiṭṭhi – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sādhū"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.178-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 273 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.134]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.178]]
> ◄  [[an10.177-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.179-sujato-pali]] ►
