---
sutta_code: "AN10.121"
sutta_title:
  - "Paccorohaṇī "
  - "Ceremony Of Descent"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.121]]
> ◄  [[an10.120-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.122-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XII. The Ceremony of Descent — AN 10.121: Forerunner
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In the same way right view is the forerunner and precursor of skillful qualities. Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives rise to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right action gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to right effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right mindfulness gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to right knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right freedom.”

1"Sūriyassa, bhikkhave, udayato etaṁ pubbaṅgamaṁ etaṁ pubbanimittaṁ, yadidaṁ – aruṇuggaṁ. Evamevaṁ kho, bhikkhave, kusalānaṁ dhammānaṁ etaṁ pubbaṅgamaṁ etaṁ pubbanimittaṁ, yadidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi. Sammādiṭṭhikassa, bhikkhave, sammāsaṅkappo pahoti, sammāsaṅkappassa sammāvācā pahoti, sammāvācassa sammākammanto pahoti, sammākammantassa sammāājīvo pahoti, sammāājīvassa sammāvāyāmo pahoti, sammāvāyāmassa sammāsati pahoti, sammāsatissa sammāsamādhi pahoti, sammāsamādhissa sammāñāṇaṁ pahoti, sammāñāṇissa sammāvimutti pahotī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.121-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 236 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.121]]
> ◄  [[an10.120-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.122-sujato-pali]] ►
