---
sutta_code: "AN10.218"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṃsappanīya "
  - "Creepy Creatures"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.218]]
> ◄  [[an10.217-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.219-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XXI. The Body Born of Deeds — AN 10.218: Intentional (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I don’t say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

2Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.


3And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action? … These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action.

And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action? … These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action? … These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action.


6When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

7I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I don’t say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

8Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. There are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. There are three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result.


9And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? … These are the three kinds of successful bodily action.

10And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? … These are the four kinds of successful verbal action.

11And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? … These are the three kinds of successful mental action.


12When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. …”

1"Nāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā byantībhāvaṁ vadāmi, tañca kho diṭṭheva dhamme upapajje vā apare vā pariyāye. Na tvevāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā dukkhassantakiriyaṁ vadāmi.

2Tatra, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti; catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti; tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti.


3Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti … pe … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti.

4Kathañca, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti … pe … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti.

5Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti … pe … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasandosabyāpatti akusalasañcetanikā dukkhudrayā dukkhavipākā hoti.


6Tividhakāyakammantasandosabyāpattiakusalaakusalasañcetanikāsañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjanti, catubbidhavacīkammanta … pe … tividhamanokammantasandosabyāpattiakusalaakusalasañcetanikāsañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjanti.

7Nāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā byantībhāvaṁ vadāmi, tañca kho diṭṭheva dhamme upapajje vā apare vā pariyāye. Na tvevāhaṁ, bhikkhave, sañcetanikānaṁ kammānaṁ katānaṁ upacitānaṁ appaṭisaṁveditvā dukkhassantakiriyaṁ vadāmi.

8Tatra kho, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti; catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti; tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti.


9Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti … pe … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā kāyakammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti.

10Kathañca, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti … pe … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, catubbidhā vacīkammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti.

11Kathañca, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti … pe … evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tividhā manokammantasampatti kusalasañcetanikā sukhudrayā sukhavipākā hoti.


12Tividhakāyakammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjanti; catubbidhavacīkammantasampatti … pe … tividhamanokammantasampattikusalasañcetanikāhetu vā, bhikkhave, sattā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjanti … pe … .

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.218-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA48.1]], [[MA15]] | A v 297 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA15]], [[EA48.1]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.218]]
> ◄  [[an10.217-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.219-sujato-pali]] ►
