---
sutta_code: "AN10.174"
sutta_title:
  - "Kammanidāna "
  - "Sources Of Deeds"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.174]]
> ◄  [[an10.173-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.175-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XVII. With Jāṇussoṇī — AN 10.174: Sources of Deeds
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I say that killing living creatures is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

2I say that stealing is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

3I say that sexual misconduct is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

4I say that lying is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

5I say that divisive speech is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

6I say that harsh speech is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

7I say that talking nonsense is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

8I say that covetousness is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

9I say that ill will is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.


10I say that wrong view is threefold: caused by greed, hate, or delusion.

And so greed, hate, and delusion are sources and origins for deeds. With the ending of greed, hate, and delusion, the sources of deeds are ended.”

1"Pāṇātipātampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

2Adinnādānampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

3Kāmesumicchācārampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

4Musāvādampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

5Pisuṇavācampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

6Pharusavācampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

7Samphappalāpampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

8Abhijjhampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

9Byāpādampāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.


10Micchādiṭṭhimpāhaṁ, bhikkhave, tividhaṁ vadāmi – lobhahetukampi, dosahetukampi, mohahetukampi.

Iti kho, bhikkhave, lobho kammanidānasambhavo, doso kammanidānasambhavo, moho kammanidānasambhavo. Lobhakkhayā kammanidānasaṅkhayo, dosakkhayā kammanidānasaṅkhayo, mohakkhayā kammanidānasaṅkhayo"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.174-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA1049]] | A v 261 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA1049]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.174]]
> ◄  [[an10.173-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.175-sujato-pali]] ►
