---
sutta_code: "AN10.16"
sutta_title:
  - "Āhuneyyasutta "
  - "Worthy of Gifts"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.16]]
> ◄  [[an10.15-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.17-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### II. A Protector — AN 10.16: Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, these ten people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world. What ten? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha; a Buddha awakened for themselves; one freed both ways; one freed by wisdom; a personal witness; one attained to view; one freed by faith; a follower by faith; a follower of the teachings; a member of the spiritual family. These are the ten people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world.”

1"Dasayime, bhikkhave, puggalā āhuneyyā pāhuneyyā dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṁ puññakkhettaṁ lokassa. Katame dasa? Tathāgato arahaṁ sammāsambuddho, paccekabuddho, ubhatobhāgavimutto, paññāvimutto, kāyasakkhī, diṭṭhippatto, saddhāvimutto, saddhānusārī, dhammānusārī, gotrabhū – ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa puggalā āhuneyyā … pe … anuttaraṁ puññakkhettaṁ lokassā"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.16-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 23 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.16]]
> ◄  [[an10.15-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.17-sujato-pali]] ►
