---
sutta_code: "AN10.93"
sutta_title:
  - "Ditthi "
  - "Views"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.93]]
> ◄  [[an10.92-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.94-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### X. With Upāli — AN 10.93: What Is Your View?
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika left Sāvatthī in the middle of the day to see the Buddha. Then it occurred to him: “It’s the wrong time to see the Buddha, as he’s in retreat. And it’s the wrong time to see the esteemed bhikkhus, as they’re in retreat. Why don’t I go to the monastery of the wanderers who follow other paths?”

2Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers who follow other paths. Now at that time, the wanderers who follow other paths had come together, making an uproar, a dreadful racket as they sat and talked about all kinds of unworthy topics.

They saw Anāthapiṇḍika coming off in the distance, and stopped each other, saying: “Be quiet, good sirs, don’t make a sound. The householder Anāthapiṇḍika, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is coming into our monastery. He is included among the white-clothed lay disciples of the ascetic Gotama, who is residing in Sāvatthī. Such venerables like the quiet, are educated to be quiet, and praise the quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he’ll see fit to approach.”


3Then those wanderers who follow other paths fell silent.

Then Anāthapiṇḍika went up to them, and exchanged greetings with those wanderers. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side. The wanderers said to him:

“Tell us, householder, what is the view of the ascetic Gotama?”

“Sirs, I don’t know all his views.”


4“Well then, since it seems you don’t know all the views of the ascetic Gotama, tell us, what are the views of the bhikkhus?”

“Sirs, I don’t know all the bhikkhus’ views.”

5“Well then, since it seems you don’t know all the views of the ascetic Gotama or of the bhikkhus, tell us, householder, what is your view?”

“Sirs, it’s not hard for me to explain what my views are. But please, let the venerables explain their own convictions first. Afterwards it won’t be hard for me to explain my views.”

6When he said this, one of the wanderers said to him: “The world is eternal. This is the only truth, other ideas are silly. That’s my view, householder.”

7Another wanderer said: “The world is not eternal. This is the only truth, other ideas are silly. That’s my view, householder.”

8Another wanderer said: “The world is finite …” … “The world is infinite …” … “The soul and the body are the same thing …” … “The soul and the body are different things …” … “A Realized One exists after death …” … “A Realized One doesn’t exist after death …” … “A Realized One both exists and doesn’t exist after death …” … “A Realized One neither exists nor doesn’t exist after death. This is the only truth, other ideas are silly. That’s my view, householder.”

9When this was said, Anāthapiṇḍika said this: “Sirs, regarding the venerable who said this: ‘The world is eternal. This is the only truth, other ideas are silly. That’s my view, householder.’ This view of his has either arisen from his own improper attention, or is conditioned by what someone else says. But that view is created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated. Anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent. And what’s impermanent is suffering. What he clings to and holds to is just suffering.


10Regarding the venerable who said this: ‘The world is not eternal. This is the only truth, other ideas are silly. That’s my view, householder.’ This view of his has either arisen from his own improper attention, or is conditioned by what someone else says. But that view is created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated. Anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent. And what’s impermanent is suffering. What he clings to and holds to is just suffering.

11Regarding the venerable who said this: ‘The world is finite …’ … ‘The world is infinite …’ … ‘The soul and the body are the same thing …’ … ‘The soul and the body are different things …’ … ‘A Realized One exists after death …’ … ‘A Realized One doesn’t exist after death …’ … ‘A Realized One both exists and doesn’t exist after death …’ … ‘A Realized One neither exists nor doesn’t exist after death. This is the only truth, other ideas are silly. That’s my view, householder.’ This view of his has either arisen from his own improper attention, or is conditioned by what someone else says. But that view is created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated. Anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent. And what’s impermanent is suffering. What he clings to and holds to is just suffering.”


12When he said this the wanderers said to him: “Householder, we’ve each explained our own convictions. Tell us, householder, what is your view?”

“Sirs, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent. And what’s impermanent is suffering. And what’s suffering is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self. That’s my view, sirs.”

13“Householder, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent. And what’s impermanent is suffering. What you cling to and hold to is just suffering.”

14“Sirs, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent. And what’s impermanent is suffering. And I’ve truly seen clearly with right wisdom that what’s suffering is not mine, I am not this, it’s not my self. And I truly understand the escape beyond that.”


15When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say. Seeing this, Anāthapiṇḍika got up from his seat. He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all they had discussed.


“Good, good, householder! That’s how you should legitimately and completely refute those foolish men from time to time.”

16Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the householder Anāthapiṇḍika with a Dhamma talk, after which Anāthapiṇḍika got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha before leaving.


17Then, not long after Anāthapiṇḍika had left, the Buddha addressed the bhikkhus: “bhikkhus, even a bhikkhu who has ordained for a hundred years in this teaching and training would legitimately and completely refute those wanderers who follow other paths just as the householder Anāthapiṇḍika did.”

#### Pali

1Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.

Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati divā divassa sāvatthiyā nikkhami bhagavantaṁ dassanāya. Atha kho anāthapiṇḍikassa gahapatissa etadahosi:  "akālo kho tāva bhagavantaṁ dassanāya. Paṭisallīno bhagavā. Manobhāvanīyānampi bhikkhūnaṁ akālo dassanāya. Paṭisallīnā manobhāvanīyā bhikkhū. Yannūnāhaṁ yena aññatitthiyānaṁ paribbājakānaṁ ārāmo tenupasaṅkameyyan"ti.

2Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena aññatitthiyānaṁ paribbājakānaṁ ārāmo tenupasaṅkami. Tena kho pana samayena aññatitthiyā paribbājakā saṅgamma samāgamma unnādino uccāsaddamahāsaddā anekavihitaṁ tiracchānakathaṁ kathentā nisinnā honti.

Addasaṁsu kho te aññatitthiyā paribbājakā anāthapiṇḍikaṁ gahapatiṁ dūratova āgacchantaṁ. Disvāna aññamaññaṁ saṇṭhāpesuṁ:  "appasaddā bhonto hontu, mā bhonto saddamakattha. Ayaṁ anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati ārāmaṁ āgacchati samaṇassa gotamassa sāvako. Yāvatā kho pana samaṇassa gotamassa sāvakā gihī odātavasanā sāvatthiyaṁ paṭivasanti, ayaṁ tesaṁ aññataro anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati. Appasaddakāmā kho pana te āyasmanto appasaddavinītā appasaddassa vaṇṇavādino. Appeva nāma appasaddaṁ parisaṁ viditvā upasaṅkamitabbaṁ maññeyyā"ti.


3Atha kho te aññatitthiyā paribbājakā tuṇhī ahesuṁ.

Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yena te aññatitthiyā paribbājakā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā tehi aññatitthiyehi paribbājakehi saddhiṁ sammodi. Sammodanīyaṁ kathaṁ sāraṇīyaṁ vītisāretvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho anāthapiṇḍikaṁ gahapatiṁ te aññatitthiyā paribbājakā etadavocuṁ: 

"Vadehi, gahapati, kiṁdiṭṭhiko samaṇo gotamo"ti?

"Na kho ahaṁ, bhante, bhagavato sabbaṁ diṭṭhiṁ jānāmī"ti.


4"Iti kira tvaṁ, gahapati, na samaṇassa gotamassa sabbaṁ diṭṭhiṁ jānāsi; vadehi, gahapati, kiṁdiṭṭhikā bhikkhū"ti?

"Bhikkhūnampi kho ahaṁ, bhante, na sabbaṁ diṭṭhiṁ jānāmī"ti.

5"Iti kira tvaṁ, gahapati, na samaṇassa gotamassa sabbaṁ diṭṭhiṁ jānāsi napi bhikkhūnaṁ sabbaṁ diṭṭhiṁ jānāsi; vadehi, gahapati, kiṁdiṭṭhikosi tuvan"ti?

"Etaṁ kho, bhante, amhehi na dukkaraṁ byākātuṁ yaṁdiṭṭhikā mayaṁ. Iṅgha tāva āyasmanto yathāsakāni diṭṭhigatāni byākarontu, pacchāpetaṁ amhehi na dukkaraṁ bhavissati byākātuṁ yaṁdiṭṭhikā mayan"ti.

6Evaṁ vutte, aññataro paribbājako anāthapiṇḍikaṁ gahapatiṁ etadavoca:  "sassato loko, idameva saccaṁ moghamaññanti – evaṁdiṭṭhiko ahaṁ, gahapatī"ti.

7Aññataropi kho paribbājako anāthapiṇḍikaṁ gahapatiṁ etadavoca:  "asassato loko, idameva saccaṁ moghamaññanti – evaṁdiṭṭhiko ahaṁ, gahapatī"ti.

8Aññataropi kho paribbājako anāthapiṇḍikaṁ gahapatiṁ etadavoca:  "antavā loko … pe … anantavā loko … taṁ jīvaṁ taṁ sarīraṁ … aññaṁ jīvaṁ aññaṁ sarīraṁ … hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā … na hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā … hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā … neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā, idameva saccaṁ moghamaññanti – evaṁdiṭṭhiko ahaṁ, gahapatī"ti.

9Evaṁ vutte, anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati te paribbājake etadavoca:  "yvāyaṁ, bhante, āyasmā evamāha:  ‘sassato loko, idameva saccaṁ moghamaññanti – evaṁdiṭṭhiko ahaṁ, gahapatī’ti, imassa ayamāyasmato diṭṭhi attano vā ayonisomanasikārahetu uppannā paratoghosapaccayā vā. Sā kho panesā diṭṭhi bhūtā saṅkhatā cetayitā paṭiccasamuppannā. Yaṁ kho pana kiñci bhūtaṁ saṅkhataṁ cetayitaṁ paṭiccasamuppannaṁ tadaniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ. Yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadeveso āyasmā allīno, tadeveso āyasmā ajjhupagato.


10Yopāyaṁ, bhante, āyasmā evamāha:  ‘asassato loko, idameva saccaṁ moghamaññanti – evaṁdiṭṭhiko ahaṁ, gahapatī’ti, imassāpi ayamāyasmato diṭṭhi attano vā ayonisomanasikārahetu uppannā paratoghosapaccayā vā. Sā kho panesā diṭṭhi bhūtā saṅkhatā cetayitā paṭiccasamuppannā. Yaṁ kho pana kiñci bhūtaṁ saṅkhataṁ cetayitaṁ paṭiccasamuppannaṁ tadaniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ. Yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadeveso āyasmā allīno, tadeveso āyasmā ajjhupagato.

11Yopāyaṁ, bhante, āyasmā evamāha:  ‘antavā loko … pe … anantavā loko … taṁ jīvaṁ taṁ sarīraṁ … aññaṁ jīvaṁ aññaṁ sarīraṁ … hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā … na hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā … hoti ca na ca hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā … neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā, idameva saccaṁ moghamaññanti – evaṁdiṭṭhiko ahaṁ, gahapatī’ti, imassāpi ayamāyasmato diṭṭhi attano vā ayonisomanasikārahetu uppannā paratoghosapaccayā vā. Sā kho panesā diṭṭhi bhūtā saṅkhatā cetayitā paṭiccasamuppannā. Yaṁ kho pana kiñci bhūtaṁ saṅkhataṁ cetayitaṁ paṭiccasamuppannaṁ tadaniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ. Yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadeveso āyasmā allīno, tadeveso āyasmā ajjhupagato"ti.


12Evaṁ vutte te paribbājakā anāthapiṇḍikaṁ gahapatiṁ etadavocuṁ:  "byākatāni kho, gahapati, amhehi sabbeheva yathāsakāni diṭṭhigatāni. Vadehi, gahapati, kiṁdiṭṭhikosi tuvan"ti?

"Yaṁ kho, bhante, kiñci bhūtaṁ saṅkhataṁ cetayitaṁ paṭiccasamuppannaṁ tadaniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ. ‘Yaṁ dukkhaṁ taṁ netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, na meso attā’ti – evaṁdiṭṭhiko ahaṁ, bhante"ti.

13"Yaṁ kho, gahapati, kiñci bhūtaṁ saṅkhataṁ cetayitaṁ paṭiccasamuppannaṁ tadaniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ. Yaṁ dukkhaṁ tadeva tvaṁ, gahapati, allīno, tadeva tvaṁ, gahapati, ajjhupagato"ti.

14"Yaṁ kho, bhante, kiñci bhūtaṁ saṅkhataṁ cetayitaṁ paṭiccasamuppannaṁ tadaniccaṁ. Yadaniccaṁ taṁ dukkhaṁ. ‘Yaṁ dukkhaṁ taṁ netaṁ mama, nesohamasmi, nameso attā’ti – evametaṁ yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṁ. Tassa ca uttari nissaraṇaṁ yathābhūtaṁ pajānāmī"ti.


15Evaṁ vutte te paribbājakā tuṇhībhūtā maṅkubhūtā pattakkhandhā adhomukhā pajjhāyantā appaṭibhānā nisīdiṁsu. Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati te paribbājake tuṇhībhūte maṅkubhūte pattakkhandhe adhomukhe pajjhāyante appaṭibhāne viditvā uṭṭhāyāsanā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati yāvatako ahosi tehi aññatitthiyehi paribbājakehi saddhiṁ kathāsallāpo taṁ sabbaṁ bhagavato ārocesi.


"Sādhu sādhu, gahapati. Evaṁ kho te, gahapati, moghapurisā kālena kālaṁ sahadhammena suniggahitaṁ niggahetabbā"ti.

16Atha kho bhagavā anāthapiṇḍikaṁ gahapatiṁ dhammiyā kathāya sandassesi samādapesi samuttejesi sampahaṁsesi. Atha kho anāthapiṇḍiko gahapati bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassito samādapito samuttejito sampahaṁsito uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṁ katvā pakkāmi.


17Atha kho bhagavā acirapakkante anāthapiṇḍike gahapatimhi bhikkhū āmantesi:  "yopi so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vassasatupasampanno imasmiṁ dhammavinaye, sopi evamevaṁ aññatitthiye paribbājake sahadhammena suniggahitaṁ niggaṇheyya yathā taṁ anāthapiṇḍikena gahapatinā niggahitā"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.93-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.201]], [[SA-2.202]], [[SA-2.204]], [[SA967]], [[SA968]], [[SA970]] | A v 185 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.202]], [[SA968]], [[AN10.96]], [[SA-2.201]], [[SA967]], [[AN3.64]], [[SA-2.204]], [[SA970]], [[AN4.185]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.24]], [[AN10.96]], [[SN4.12.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.93]]
> ◄  [[an10.92-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.94-sujato-pali]] ►
