---
sutta_code: "AN10.13"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṃyojana "
  - "Fetters"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.13]]
> ◄  [[an10.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.14-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### II. A Protector — AN 10.13: Fetters
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, there are ten fetters. What ten? The five lower fetters and the five higher fetters. What are the five lower fetters? Identity view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, sensual desire, and ill will. These are the five lower fetters.

2What are the five higher fetters? Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five higher fetters. These are the ten fetters.”

1"Dasayimāni, bhikkhave, saṁyojanāni. Katamāni dasa? Pañcorambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni, pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni. Katamāni pañcorambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni? Sakkāyadiṭṭhi, vicikicchā, sīlabbataparāmāso, kāmacchando, byāpādo – imāni pañcorambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni.

2Katamāni pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni? Rūparāgo, arūparāgo, māno, uddhaccaṁ, avijjā – imāni pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni. Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dasa saṁyojanānī"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.13-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 17 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.13]]
> ◄  [[an10.12-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.14-sujato-pali]] ►
