---
sutta_code: "AN10.130"
sutta_title:
  - "Parisuddha "
  - "Purified"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.130]]
> ◄  [[an10.129-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.131-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### XIII. Purified — AN 10.130: Eighth
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, these ten things when developed and cultivated don’t culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion apart from the Holy One’s training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten things that when developed and cultivated don’t culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion apart from the Holy One’s training.”

1"Dasayime, bhikkhave, dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā rāgavinayapariyosānā honti dosavinayapariyosānā honti mohavinayapariyosānā honti, nāññatra sugatavinayā. Katame dasa? Sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāvimutti – ime kho, bhikkhave, dasa dhammā bhāvitā bahulīkatā rāgavinayapariyosānā honti dosavinayapariyosānā honti mohavinayapariyosānā honti, nāññatra sugatavinayā"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.130-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 239 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.130]]
> ◄  [[an10.129-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.131-sujato-pali]] ►
