---
sutta_code: "AN10.31"
sutta_title:
  - "Upāli "
  - "With Upali"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.31]]
> ◄  [[an10.30-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.32-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### IV. With Upāli — AN 10.31: With Upāli
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Sir, for how many reasons did the Realized One lay down training rules for his disciples and recite the monastic code?”


2“Upāli, the Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples and recited the monastic code for ten reasons. What ten? For the well-being of the Saṅgha and for the comfort of the Saṅgha. For keeping difficult persons in check and for the comfort of good-hearted bhikkhus. For restraining defilements that affect the present life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come. For inspiring confidence in those without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it. For the continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training.

The Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples and recited the monastic code for these ten reasons.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho āyasmā upāli yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā upāli bhagavantaṁ etadavoca: 

"Kati nu kho, bhante, atthavase paṭicca tathāgatena sāvakānaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ, pātimokkhaṁ uddiṭṭhan"ti?


2"Dasa kho, upāli, atthavase paṭicca tathāgatena sāvakānaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ, pātimokkhaṁ uddiṭṭhaṁ. Katame dasa? Saṅghasuṭṭhutāya, saṅghaphāsutāya, dummaṅkūnaṁ puggalānaṁ niggahāya, pesalānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ phāsuvihārāya, diṭṭhadhammikānaṁ āsavānaṁ saṁvarāya, samparāyikānaṁ āsavānaṁ paṭighātāya, appasannānaṁ pasādāya, pasannānaṁ bhiyyobhāvāya, saddhammaṭṭhitiyā, vinayānuggahāya."

"Ime kho, upāli, dasa atthavase paṭicca tathāgatena sāvakānaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ, pātimokkhaṁ uddiṭṭhan"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.31-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA46.1]] | A v 70 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA46.1]], [[PLI-TV-PVR1.1]], [[PLI-TV-PVR2.1]], [[PLI-TV-PVR9]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.31]]
> ◄  [[an10.30-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.32-sujato-pali]] ►
