---
sutta_code: "AN10.22"
sutta_title:
  - "Sīhanāda "
  - "Lion’s Roar"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.22]]
> ◄  [[an10.21-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.23-sujato-pali]] ►

## Aṅguttara Nikāya - The Numerical Discourses

## 10: The Book of the Tens

### III. The Great Chapter — AN 10.22: Hypotheses
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

2“Ānanda, I claim to be assured regarding the teachings that lead to realizing by insight the various different hypotheses. So I am able to teach the Dhamma in appropriate ways to different people. Practicing accordingly, when something exists they’ll know it exists. When it doesn’t exist they’ll know it doesn’t exist. When something is inferior they’ll know it’s inferior. When it’s superior they’ll know it’s superior. When something is not supreme they’ll know it’s not supreme. When it is supreme they’ll know it’s supreme. And they will know or see or realize it in whatever way it should be known or seen or realized. This is possible.

But this is the unsurpassable knowledge, that is: truly knowing each and every case. And Ānanda, I say that there is no other knowledge better or finer than this.

3The Realized One possesses ten powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel. What ten? Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible, and the impossible as impossible. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel.

4Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of causes and reasons. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

5Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of practice lead. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …


6Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many and diverse elements. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

7Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse attitudes of sentient beings. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

8Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with his mind. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

9Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the jhānas, liberations, immersions, and attainments. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

10Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives, with features and details. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …


11Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn — inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …


12Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …


13These are the ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One possesses. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the holy wheel.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho āyasmantaṁ ānandaṁ bhagavā etadavoca: 

2"Ye te, ānanda, dhammā tesaṁ tesaṁ adhivuttipadānaṁ abhiññā sacchikiriyāya saṁvattanti, visārado ahaṁ, ānanda, tattha paṭijānāmi. ‘Tesaṁ tesaṁ tathā tathā dhammaṁ desetuṁ yathā yathā paṭipanno santaṁ vā atthīti ñassati, asantaṁ vā natthīti ñassati, hīnaṁ vā hīnanti ñassati, paṇītaṁ vā paṇītanti ñassati, sauttaraṁ vā sauttaranti ñassati, anuttaraṁ vā anuttaranti ñassati; yathā yathā vā pana taṁ ñāteyyaṁ vā daṭṭheyyaṁ vā sacchikareyyaṁ vā tathā tathā ñassati vā dakkhati vā sacchikarissati vā’ti ṭhānametaṁ vijjati.

Etadānuttariyaṁ, ānanda, ñāṇānaṁ yadidaṁ tattha tattha yathābhūtañāṇaṁ. Etasmā cāhaṁ, ānanda, ñāṇā aññaṁ ñāṇaṁ uttaritaraṁ vā paṇītataraṁ vā natthīti vadāmi.

3Dasayimāni, ānanda, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalāni, yehi balehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṁ ṭhānaṁ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṁ nadati, brahmacakkaṁ pavatteti. Katamāni dasa? Idhānanda, tathāgato ṭhānañca ṭhānato aṭṭhānañca aṭṭhānato yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. Yampānanda, tathāgato ṭhānañca ṭhānato aṭṭhānañca aṭṭhānato yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, idampānanda, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṁ hoti, yaṁ balaṁ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṁ ṭhānaṁ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṁ nadati, brahmacakkaṁ pavatteti. (1)

4Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato atītānāgatapaccuppannānaṁ kammasamādānānaṁ ṭhānaso hetuso vipākaṁ yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe … . (2)

5Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato sabbatthagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe … . (3)


6Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato anekadhātuṁ nānādhātuṁ lokaṁ yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe … . (4)

7Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato sattānaṁ nānādhimuttikataṁ yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe … . (5)

8Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato parasattānaṁ parapuggalānaṁ indriyaparopariyattaṁ yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe … . (6)

9Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato jhānavimokkhasamādhisamāpattīnaṁ saṅkilesaṁ vodānaṁ vuṭṭhānaṁ yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe … . (7)

10Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato anekavihitaṁ pubbenivāsaṁ anussarati, seyyathidaṁ – ekampi jātiṁ dvepi jātiyo … pe … iti sākāraṁ sauddesaṁ anekavihitaṁ pubbenivāsaṁ anussarati. Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe … . (8)


11Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena … pe … yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. Yampānanda … pe … idampānanda … pe … . (9)


12Puna caparaṁ, ānanda, tathāgato āsavānaṁ khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Yampānanda, tathāgato āsavānaṁ khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ … pe … sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Idampānanda, tathāgatassa tathāgatabalaṁ hoti, yaṁ balaṁ āgamma tathāgato āsabhaṁ ṭhānaṁ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṁ nadati, brahmacakkaṁ pavatteti. (10)


13Imāni kho, ānanda, dasa tathāgatassa tathāgatabalāni, yehi balehi samannāgato tathāgato āsabhaṁ ṭhānaṁ paṭijānāti, parisāsu sīhanādaṁ nadati, brahmacakkaṁ pavattetī"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.22-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 36 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.22]]
> ◄  [[an10.21-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[an10.23-sujato-pali]] ►
