---
sutta_code: "SN36.26"
sutta_title:
  - "Sambahulabhikkhusutta "
  - "A Number of Bhikkhus"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.26]]
> ◄  [[sn36.25-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.27-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### III. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight — SN36.26: With Several bhikkhus
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then several bhikkhus went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Sir, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?”

“bhikkhus, there are these three feelings. pleasant, painful, and neutral. These are called feeling.

Feeling originates from contact. Craving is the practice that leads to the origin of feeling.

When contact ceases, feeling ceases. … Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho sambahulā bhikkhū yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkamiṁsu; upasaṅkamitvā … pe … ekamantaṁ nisinnā kho te bhikkhū bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ:

"katamā nu kho, bhante, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā? Katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṁ nissaraṇan"ti?

"Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vedanā – sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā. Imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, vedanā.

Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo. Taṇhā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā.

Phassanirodhā … pe … yo vedanāya chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṁ. Idaṁ vedanāya nissaraṇan"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.26-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA478]] | S iv 234 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA478]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN13]], [[MN137]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.26]]
> ◄  [[sn36.25-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.27-sujato-pali]] ►
