---
sutta_code: "SN36.16"
sutta_title:
  - "DutiyĀnandasutta "
  - "Ānanda (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.16]]
> ◄  [[sn36.15-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.17-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### II. In Private — SN36.16: With Ānanda (2nd)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: “Ānanda, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?”


“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The bhikkhus will listen and remember it.”

“Well then, Ānanda, listen and pay close attention, I will speak.”

“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:


“Ānanda, there are these three feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral. These are called feeling. … For a bhikkhu who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have been tranquilized.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinnaṁ kho āyasmantaṁ ānandaṁ bhagavā etadavoca: "katamā nu kho, ānanda, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṁ nissaraṇan"ti?


"Bhagavaṁmūlakā no, bhante, dhammā bhagavaṁnettikā bhagavaṁpaṭisaraṇā. Sādhu, bhante, bhagavantaññeva paṭibhātu etassa bhāsitassa attho. Bhagavato sutvā bhikkhū dhāressantī"ti.

"Tena hi, ānanda, suṇohi, sādhukaṁ manasi karohi; bhāsissāmī"ti.

"Evaṁ, bhante"ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paccassosi. Bhagavā etadavoca: 


"tisso imā, ānanda, vedanā – sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā – imā vuccanti, ānanda, vedanā … pe … phassasamudayā … pe … khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo paṭippassaddho hoti, doso paṭippassaddho hoti, moho paṭippassaddho hotī"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.16-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SA476]] | S iv 221 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN36.11]], [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SN36.15]], [[SN36.17]], [[SN36.18]], [[SN36.1]], [[SA476]], [[SN36.23]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN36.11]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.16]]
> ◄  [[sn36.15-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.17-sujato-pali]] ►
