---
sutta_code: "SN36.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Rahogatasutta "
  - "Alone"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.11]]
> ◄  [[sn36.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.12-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### II. In Private — SN36.11: In Private
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Just now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind. The Buddha has spoken of three feelings. Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings the Buddha has spoken of.

But the Buddha has also said: ‘Suffering includes whatever is felt.’ What was the Buddha referring to when he said this?”


2“Good, good, bhikkhu! I have spoken of these three feelings. Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings I have spoken of.

But I have also said: ‘Suffering includes whatever is felt.’

When I said this I was referring to the impermanence of conditions, to the fact that conditions are liable to end, vanish, fade away, cease, and perish.

But I have also explained the progressive cessation of conditions. For someone who has attained the first jhāna, speech has ceased. For someone who has attained the second jhāna, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have ceased. For someone who has attained the third jhāna, rapture has ceased. For someone who has attained the fourth jhāna, breathing has ceased. For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has ceased. For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased. For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has ceased. For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased. For a bhikkhu who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have ceased.


And I have also explained the progressive stilling of conditions. For someone who has attained the first jhāna, speech has stilled. For someone who has attained the second jhāna, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have stilled. … For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have stilled. For a bhikkhu who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have stilled.

There are these six levels of tranquility. For someone who has attained the first jhāna, speech has been tranquilized. For someone who has attained the second jhāna, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have been tranquilized. For someone who has attained the third jhāna, rapture has been tranquilized. For someone who has attained the fourth jhāna, breathing has been tranquilized. For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have been tranquilized. For a bhikkhu who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have been tranquilized.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"idha mayhaṁ, bhante, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṁ cetaso parivitakko udapādi – tisso vedanā vuttā bhagavatā. Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā – imā tisso vedanā vuttā bhagavatā.

Vuttaṁ kho panetaṁ bhagavatā: ‘Yaṁ kiñci vedayitaṁ taṁ dukkhasmin’ti. Kiṁ nu kho etaṁ bhagavatā sandhāya bhāsitaṁ: ‘Yaṁ kiñci vedayitaṁ taṁ dukkhasmin’"ti?


2"Sādhu sādhu, bhikkhu. Tisso imā, bhikkhu, vedanā vuttā mayā. Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā – imā tisso vedanā vuttā mayā.

Vuttaṁ kho panetaṁ, bhikkhu, mayā: ‘Yaṁ kiñci vedayitaṁ, taṁ dukkhasmin’ti.

Taṁ kho panetaṁ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhārānaṁyeva aniccataṁ sandhāya bhāsitaṁ: ‘Yaṁ kiñci vedayitaṁ taṁ dukkhasmin’ti. Taṁ kho panetaṁ, bhikkhu, mayā saṅkhārānaṁyeva khayadhammataṁ … pe … vayadhammataṁ … pe … virāgadhammataṁ … pe … nirodhadhammataṁ … pe … vipariṇāmadhammataṁ sandhāya bhāsitaṁ: ‘Yaṁ kiñci vedayitaṁ taṁ dukkhasmin’ti.

>

Atha kho pana, bhikkhu, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṁ nirodho akkhāto. Paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vācā niruddhā hoti. Dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vitakkavicārā niruddhā honti. Tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa pīti niruddhā hoti. Catutthaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa assāsapassāsā niruddhā honti. Ākāsānañcāyatanaṁ samāpannassa rūpasaññā niruddhā hoti. Viññāṇañcāyatanaṁ samāpannassa ākāsānañcāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti. Ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ samāpannassa viññāṇañcāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti. Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ samāpannassa ākiñcaññāyatanasaññā niruddhā hoti. Saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca niruddhā honti. Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo niruddho hoti, doso niruddho hoti, moho niruddho hoti.


Atha kho, bhikkhu, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṁ vūpasamo akkhāto. Paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vācā vūpasantā hoti. Dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vitakkavicārā vūpasantā honti … pe … saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca vūpasantā honti. Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo vūpasanto hoti, doso vūpasanto hoti, moho vūpasanto hoti.

Chayimā, bhikkhu, passaddhiyo. Paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vācā paṭippassaddhā hoti. Dutiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vitakkavicārā paṭippassaddhā honti. Tatiyaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa pīti paṭippassaddhā hoti. Catutthaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa assāsapassāsā paṭippassaddhā honti. Saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca paṭippassaddhā honti. Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo paṭippassaddho hoti, doso paṭippassaddho hoti, moho paṭippassaddho hotī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SA476]] | S iv 216 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN36.1]], [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SN36.15]], [[SN36.16]], [[SN36.17]], [[SN36.18]], [[SA476]], [[SN36.23]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.32]], [[AN9.31]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.11]]
> ◄  [[sn36.10-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.12-sujato-pali]] ►
