---
sutta_code: "SN36.22"
sutta_title:
  - "Aṭṭhasatasutta "
  - "The Theme of the Hundred and Eight"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.22]]
> ◄  [[sn36.21-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.23-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### III. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight — SN36.22: The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1“bhikkhus, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching on the hundred and eight. Listen …

And what is the exposition of the teaching on the hundred and eight? bhikkhus, in one explanation I’ve spoken of two feelings. In another explanation I’ve spoken of three feelings, or five, six, eighteen, thirty-six, or a hundred and eight feelings.

2And what are the two feelings? Physical and mental. These are called the two feelings.

And what are the three feelings? Pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings. …

And what are the five feelings? The faculties of pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. …

And what are the six feelings? Feeling born of eye contact … ear contact … nose contact … tongue contact … body contact … mind contact. …

And what are the eighteen feelings? There are six preoccupations with happiness, six preoccupations with sadness, and six preoccupations with equanimity. …

And what are the thirty-six feelings? Six kinds of lay happiness and six kinds of renunciate happiness. Six kinds of lay sadness and six kinds of renunciate sadness. Six kinds of lay equanimity and six kinds of renunciate equanimity. …

And what are the hundred and eight feelings? Thirty six feelings in the past, future, and present. These are called the hundred and eight feelings.

This is the exposition of the teaching on the hundred and eight.”

1"Aṭṭhasatapariyāyaṁ vo, bhikkhave, dhammapariyāyaṁ desessāmi. Taṁ suṇātha.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasatapariyāyo, dhammapariyāyo? Dvepi mayā, bhikkhave, vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; tissopi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; pañcapi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; chapi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; aṭṭhārasāpi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; chattiṁsāpi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; aṭṭhasatampi mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena.

2Katamā ca, bhikkhave, dve vedanā? Kāyikā ca cetasikā ca – imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, dve vedanā.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, tisso vedanā? Sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā – imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, tisso vedanā.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, pañca vedanā? Sukhindriyaṁ, dukkhindriyaṁ, somanassindriyaṁ, domanassindriyaṁ, upekkhindriyaṁ – imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, pañca vedanā.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, cha vedanā? Cakkhusamphassajā vedanā … pe … manosamphassajā vedanā – imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, cha vedanā.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, aṭṭhārasa vedanā? Cha somanassūpavicārā, cha domanassūpavicārā, cha upekkhūpavicārā – imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, aṭṭhārasa vedanā.

Katamā ca, bhikkhave, chattiṁsa vedanā? Cha gehasitāni somanassāni, cha nekkhammasitāni somanassāni, cha gehasitāni domanassāni, cha nekkhammasitāni domanassāni, cha gehasitā upekkhā, cha nekkhammasitā upekkhā – imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, chattiṁsa vedanā.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasataṁ vedanā? Atītā chattiṁsa vedanā, anāgatā chattiṁsa vedanā, paccuppannā chattiṁsa vedanā – imā vuccanti, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasataṁ vedanā.

Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasatapariyāyo dhammapariyāyo"ti.

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.22-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 231 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN48.31]], [[SN48.32]], [[SN48.33]], [[SN48.34]], [[SN48.35]], [[SN48.36]], [[SN48.37]], [[SN48.38]], [[SN48.39]], [[SN48.40]], [[MN137]], [[SN36.15]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.22]]
> ◄  [[sn36.21-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.23-sujato-pali]] ►
