---
sutta_code: "SN36.15"
sutta_title:
  - "PaṭhamĀnandasutta "
  - "Ānanda (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.15]]
> ◄  [[sn36.14-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.16-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### II. In Private — SN36.15: With Ānanda (1st)
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha … sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Sir, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?”


“Ānanda, there are these three feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral. These are called feeling.

Feeling originates from contact. When contact ceases, feeling ceases.


The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.


The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling: this is its gratification.

That feeling is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape.


But I have also explained the progressive cessation of conditions. For someone who has attained the first jhāna, speech has ceased. … For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased. For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have ceased.

And I have also explained the progressive stilling of conditions. For someone who has attained the first jhāna, speech has stilled. … For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have stilled. For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have stilled.

And I have also explained the progressive tranquilizing of conditions. For someone who has attained the first jhāna, speech has been tranquilized. … For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has been tranquilized. For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has been tranquilized. For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has been tranquilized. For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has been tranquilized. For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have been tranquilized. For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have been tranquilized.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho āyasmā ānando yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi, ekamantaṁ nisinno kho āyasmā ānando bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"katamā nu kho, bhante, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṁ nissaraṇan"ti?


"Tisso imā, Ānanda, vedanā – sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā – imā vuccanti, Ānanda, vedanā.

Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo; phassanirodhā vedanānirodho.


Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi.


Yaṁ vedanāṁ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṁ somanassaṁ, ayaṁ vedanāya assādo.

Yaṁ vedanā aniccā dukkhā vipariṇāmadhammā, ayaṁ vedanāya ādīnavo.

Yo vedanāya chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṁ, idaṁ vedanāya nissaraṇaṁ.


Atha kho panānanda, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṁ nirodho akkhāto. Paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vācā niruddhā hoti … pe … saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca niruddhā honti. Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo niruddho hoti, doso niruddho hoti, moho niruddho hoti.

Atha kho panānanda, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṁ vūpasamo akkhāto. Paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vācā vūpasantā hoti … pe … saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca vūpasantā honti. Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo vūpasanto hoti, doso vūpasanto hoti, moho vūpasanto hoti.

Atha kho panānanda, mayā anupubbasaṅkhārānaṁ paṭippassaddhi akkhātā. Paṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ samāpannassa vācā paṭippassaddhā hoti … pe … ākāsānañcāyatanaṁ samāpannassa rūpasaññā paṭippassaddhā hoti. Viññāṇañcāyatanaṁ samāpannassa ākāsānañcāyatanasaññā paṭippassaddhā hoti. Ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ samāpannassa viññāṇañcāyatanasaññā paṭippassaddhā hoti. Nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ samāpannassa ākiñcaññāyatanasaññā paṭippassaddhā hoti. Saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ samāpannassa saññā ca vedanā ca paṭippassaddhā honti. Khīṇāsavassa bhikkhuno rāgo paṭippassaddho hoti, doso paṭippassaddho hoti, moho paṭippassaddho hotī”ti.

Pañcamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.15-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SA476]] | S iv 219 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN36.11]], [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SN36.16]], [[SN36.17]], [[SN36.18]], [[SN36.1]], [[SA476]], [[SN36.23]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN36.11]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.15]]
> ◄  [[sn36.14-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.16-sujato-pali]] ►
