---
sutta_code: "SN36.23"
sutta_title:
  - "Aññatarabhikkhusutta "
  - "A Certain Bhikkhu"
sutta-version: "Ven. Sujato"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.23]]
> ◄  [[sn36.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.24-sujato-pali]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 36. Vedanāsaṁyutta: On Feelings

### III. The Explanation of the Hundred and Eight — SN36.23: With a bhikkhu
#### B. Sujato


- © Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato. 

1Then a bhikkhu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Sir, what is feeling? What’s the origin of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the origin of feeling? What’s the cessation of feeling? What’s the practice that leads to the cessation of feeling? And what is feeling’s gratification, drawback, and escape?”


2“bhikkhu, there are these three feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral. These are called feeling.

Feeling originates from contact. Craving is the practice that leads to the origin of feeling.


When contact ceases, feeling ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.


The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling: this is its gratification.

That feeling is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape.”

#### Pali

1Atha kho aññataro bhikkhu yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so bhikkhu bhagavantaṁ etadavoca:

"katamā nu kho, bhante, vedanā, katamo vedanāsamudayo, katamā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā? Katamo vedanānirodho, katamā vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā? Ko vedanāya assādo, ko ādīnavo, kiṁ nissaraṇan"ti?


2"Tisso imā, bhikkhu, vedanā – sukhā vedanā, dukkhā vedanā, adukkhamasukhā vedanā. Imā vuccanti, bhikkhu, vedanā.

Phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo. Taṇhā vedanāsamudayagāminī paṭipadā.


Phassanirodhā vedanānirodho. Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo vedanānirodhagāminī paṭipadā, seyyathidaṁ – sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi.


Yaṁ vedanāṁ paṭicca uppajjati sukhaṁ somanassaṁ, ayaṁ vedanāya assādo;

yaṁ vedanā aniccā dukkhā vipariṇāmadhammā, ayaṁ vedanāya ādīnavo;

yo vedanāya chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānaṁ, idaṁ vedanāya nissaraṇan"ti.

Tatiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn36.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SA476]] | S iv 232 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN36.15]], [[SN36.16]], [[SN36.17]], [[SN36.18]], [[SA473]], [[SA474]], [[SA476]], [[SN36.11]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN13]], [[MN137]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN36]]  / 🌐 [[SN36.23]]
> ◄  [[sn36.22-sujato-pali]] 📜  [[sn36.24-sujato-pali]] ►
