---
sutta_code: "SN56.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhisutta "
  - "Concentration"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn56.2-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 56.1 Samādhisuttaṃ

## SN 56.1 The Discourse on samādhi

1071. Sāvatthinidānaṃ. ‘‘Samādhiṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvetha. Samāhito, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Kiñca yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti? ‘Idaṃ dukkha’nti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti. Samādhiṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvetha. Samāhito, bhikkhave, bhikkhu yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti’’.

1071.At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, develop samādhi. A collected bhikkhu, bhikkhus, understands things as they really are. And what does he understand as it really is? He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the path leading to the cessation of suffering.’ Bhikkhus, develop samādhi. A collected bhikkhu, bhikkhus, understands things as they really are.”

‘‘Tasmātiha, bhikkhave, ‘idaṃ dukkha’nti yogo karaṇīyo, ‘ayaṃ dukkhasamudayo’ti yogo karaṇīyo, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodho’ti yogo karaṇīyo, ‘ayaṃ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yogo karaṇīyo’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.

“Therefore, bhikkhus, an endeavor should be made to understand: ‘This is suffering.’ An endeavor should be made to understand: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’ An endeavor should be made to understand: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’ An endeavor should be made to understand: ‘This is the path leading to the cessation of suffering.’”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA429]] | S v 414 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA429]], [[AN11.2]], [[SN22.5]], [[SN35.99]], [[PE5]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn56.2-deepseek-pali]] ►
