---
sutta_code: "SN45.162"
sutta_title:
  - "Vidhāsutta "
  - "Discriminations"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.162]]
> ◄  [[sn45.161-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn45.163-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### XIII. Searches — SN45.162: Discriminations
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are three kinds of discrimination. What three? One discriminates, thinking that ‘I’m better’ or ‘I’m equal’ or ‘I’m worse’. These are the three kinds of discrimination.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three kinds of discrimination. What is the noble eightfold path? It’s when a bhikkhu develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three kinds of discrimination.”

(This should be expanded as in the section on searches.)

1"Tisso imā, bhikkhave, vidhā. Katamā tisso? ‘Seyyohamasmī’ti vidhā, ‘sadisohamasmī’ti vidhā, ‘hīnohamasmī’ti vidhā – imā kho, bhikkhave, tisso vidhā. Imāsaṁ kho, bhikkhave, tissannaṁ vidhānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo.

Katamo ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sammādiṭṭhiṁ bhāveti … pe … sammāsamādhiṁ bhāveti vivekanissitaṁ virāganissitaṁ nirodhanissitaṁ vossaggapariṇāmiṁ … imāsaṁ kho, bhikkhave tissannaṁ vidhānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ayaṁ ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo bhāvetabbo"ti. (Yathā esanā, evaṁ vitthāretabbaṁ.)

Dutiyaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.162-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.162]]
> ◄  [[sn45.161-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn45.163-pali-sc]] ►
