---
sutta_code: "SN45.48"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.48]]
> ◄  [[sn45.42-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn45.49-pali-sc]] ►

## 45. Maggasaṁyutta: On the Path

### V. Abbreviated Texts on Followers of Other Paths — SN45.48: Extinguishment by Not Grasping
#### B. Sujato


1At Sāvatthī.

“bhikkhus, if wanderers who follow another path were to ask you: ‘Reverends, what’s the purpose of living the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama?’ You should answer them like this: ‘The purpose of living the spiritual life under the Buddha is extinguishment by not grasping.’

If wanderers who follow other paths were to ask you: ‘Is there a path and a practice for extinguishment by not grasping?’ You should answer them like this: ‘There is a path and a practice for extinguishment by not grasping.’

And what is that path, what is that practice for extinguishment by not grasping? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this is the practice for extinguishment by not grasping.


When questioned by wanderers who follow other paths, that’s how you should answer them.”

Sāvatthinidānaṁ.

“Sace vo, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṁ puccheyyuṁ: ‘kimatthiyaṁ, āvuso, samaṇe gotame brahmacariyaṁ vussatī’ti, evaṁ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṁ aññatitthiyānaṁ paribbājakānaṁ evaṁ byākareyyātha: ‘anupādāparinibbānatthaṁ kho, āvuso, bhagavati brahmacariyaṁ vussatī’ti.

Sace pana vo, bhikkhave, aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṁ puccheyyuṁ: ‘atthi panāvuso, maggo, atthi paṭipadā anupādāparinibbānāyā’ti, evaṁ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṁ aññatitthiyānaṁ paribbājakānaṁ evaṁ byākareyyātha: ‘atthi kho, āvuso, maggo, atthi paṭipadā anupādāparinibbānāyā’ti.

Katamo ca, bhikkhave, maggo, katamā ca paṭipadā anupādāparinibbānāya? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, seyyathidaṁ — sammādiṭṭhi … pe … sammāsamādhi. Ayaṁ, bhikkhave, maggo, ayaṁ paṭipadā anupādāparinibbānāyāti.


Evaṁ puṭṭhā tumhe, bhikkhave, tesaṁ aññatitthiyānaṁ paribbājakānaṁ evaṁ byākareyyāthā”ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.

Aññatitthiyapeyyālaṁ.

Tassuddānaṁ

Virāgasaṁyojanaṁ anusayaṁ,  
Addhānaṁ āsavā khayā;  
Vijjāvimuttiñāṇañca,  
Anupādāya aṭṭhamī.

[[sn45.42-47#content]][[Clean Files 3/bodhi/SN Bodhi 5/SN45-56/SN45/SN45.49#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.48-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.48]]
> ◄  [[sn45.42-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn45.49-pali-sc]] ►
