---
sutta_code: "SN12.23"
sutta_title:
  - "Upanisasutta "
  - "Proximate Cause"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.23]]
> ◄  [[sn12.22-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.24-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 12.23 Upanisasuttaṃ

## SN 12.23 The Upanisa Sutta

23. Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati…pe… ‘‘jānato ahaṃ, bhikkhave, passato āsavānaṃ khayaṃ vadāmi, no ajānato no apassato. Kiñca, bhikkhave, jānato kiṃ passato āsavānaṃ khayo hoti? Iti rūpaṃ iti rūpassa samudayo iti rūpassa atthaṅgamo, iti vedanā…pe… iti saññā… iti saṅkhārā… iti viññāṇaṃ iti viññāṇassa samudayo iti viññāṇassa atthaṅgamoti. Evaṃ kho, bhikkhave, jānato evaṃ passato āsavānaṃ khayo hoti’’.

23.At Sāvatthī the Blessed One was dwelling… “Monks, I declare the destruction of the taints for one who knows and sees, not for one who does not know or see. And what, monks, does one know and see for the destruction of the taints? ‘Thus is form, thus is the origin of form, thus is the passing away of form. Thus is feeling… Thus is perception… Thus are volitional formations… Thus is consciousness, thus is the origin of consciousness, thus is the passing away of consciousness.’ Thus, monks, for one who knows and sees in this way, the taints are destroyed.”

‘‘Yampissa taṃ, bhikkhave, khayasmiṃ khayeññāṇaṃ, tampi saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, khayeñāṇassa upanisā? ‘Vimuttī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Vimuttimpāhaṃ [vimuttimpahaṃ (sī. syā. kaṃ.)], bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, vimuttiyā upanisā? ‘Virāgo’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Virāgampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, virāgassa upanisā? ‘Nibbidā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Nibbidampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, nibbidāya upanisā? ‘Yathābhūtañāṇadassana’ntissa vacanīyaṃ. Yathābhūtañāṇadassanampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, yathābhūtañāṇadassanassa upanisā? ‘Samādhī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Samādhimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ.

“And that, monks, which is the knowledge of the destruction of the taints, that too, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for the knowledge of the destruction of the taints? ‘Liberation,’ it should be said. Liberation, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for liberation? ‘Dispassion,’ it should be said. Dispassion, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for dispassion? ‘Disenchantment,’ it should be said. Disenchantment, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for disenchantment? ‘Knowledge and vision of things as they really are,’ it should be said. Knowledge and vision of things as they really are, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for knowledge and vision of things as they really are? ‘samādhi,’ it should be said. samādhi, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause.”

‘‘Kā ca, bhikkhave, samādhissa upanisā? ‘Sukha’ntissa vacanīyaṃ. Sukhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, sukhassa upanisā? ‘Passaddhī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Passaddhimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, passaddhiyā upanisā? ‘Pītī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Pītimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, pītiyā upanisā? ‘Pāmojja’ntissa vacanīyaṃ. Pāmojjampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, pāmojjassa upanisā? ‘Saddhā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Saddhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ.

“And what, monks, is the proximate cause for samādhi? ‘Happiness,’ it should be said. Happiness, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for happiness? ‘Tranquility,’ it should be said. Tranquility, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for tranquility? ‘Rapture,’ it should be said. Rapture, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for rapture? ‘Gladness,’ it should be said. Gladness, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for gladness? ‘Confidence,’ it should be said. Confidence, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause.”

‘‘Kā ca, bhikkhave, saddhāya upanisā? ‘Dukkha’ntissa vacanīyaṃ. Dukkhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, dukkhassa upanisā? ‘Jātī’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Jātimpāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, jātiyā upanisā? ‘Bhavo’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Bhavampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, bhavassa upanisā? ‘Upādāna’ntissa vacanīyaṃ. Upādānampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ. Kā ca, bhikkhave, upādānassa upanisā? ‘Taṇhā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Taṇhampāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanisaṃ vadāmi, no anupanisaṃ.

“And what, monks, is the proximate cause for confidence? ‘Suffering,’ it should be said. Suffering, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for suffering? ‘Birth,’ it should be said. Birth, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for birth? ‘Existence,’ it should be said. Existence, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for existence? ‘Clinging,’ it should be said. Clinging, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for clinging? ‘Craving,’ it should be said. Craving, monks, I declare, has a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause.”

‘‘Kā ca, bhikkhave, taṇhāya upanisā? ‘Vedanā’tissa vacanīyaṃ…pe… ‘phasso’tissa vacanīyaṃ… ‘saḷāyatana’ntissa vacanīyaṃ… ‘nāmarūpa’ntissa vacanīyaṃ… ‘viññāṇa’ntissa vacanīyaṃ… ‘saṅkhārā’tissa vacanīyaṃ. Saṅkhārepāhaṃ, bhikkhave, saupanise vadāmi, no anupanise. Kā ca, bhikkhave, saṅkhārānaṃ upanisā? ‘Avijjā’tissa vacanīyaṃ.

“And what, monks, is the proximate cause for craving? ‘Feeling,’ it should be said… ‘Contact,’ it should be said… ‘The six sense bases,’ it should be said… ‘Name-and-form,’ it should be said… ‘Consciousness,’ it should be said… ‘Volitional formations,’ it should be said. Volitional formations, monks, I declare, have a proximate cause, not without a proximate cause. And what, monks, is the proximate cause for volitional formations? ‘Ignorance,’ it should be said.”

‘‘Iti kho, bhikkhave, avijjūpanisā saṅkhārā, saṅkhārūpanisaṃ viññāṇaṃ, viññāṇūpanisaṃ nāmarūpaṃ, nāmarūpūpanisaṃ saḷāyatanaṃ, saḷāyatanūpaniso phasso, phassūpanisā vedanā, vedanūpanisā taṇhā, taṇhūpanisaṃ upādānaṃ, upādānūpaniso bhavo, bhavūpanisā jāti, jātūpanisaṃ dukkhaṃ, dukkhūpanisā saddhā, saddhūpanisaṃ pāmojjaṃ, pāmojjūpanisā pīti, pītūpanisā passaddhi, passaddhūpanisaṃ sukhaṃ, sukhūpaniso samādhi, samādhūpanisaṃ yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ, yathābhūtañāṇadassanūpanisā nibbidā, nibbidūpaniso virāgo, virāgūpanisā vimutti, vimuttūpanisaṃ khayeñāṇaṃ.

“Thus, monks, volitional formations are conditioned by ignorance; consciousness is conditioned by volitional formations; name-and-form is conditioned by consciousness; the six sense bases are conditioned by name-and-form; contact is conditioned by the six sense bases; feeling is conditioned by contact; craving is conditioned by feeling; clinging is conditioned by craving; existence is conditioned by clinging; birth is conditioned by existence; suffering is conditioned by birth; confidence is conditioned by suffering; gladness is conditioned by confidence; rapture is conditioned by gladness; tranquility is conditioned by rapture; happiness is conditioned by tranquility; samādhi is conditioned by happiness; knowledge and vision of things as they really are is conditioned by samādhi; disenchantment is conditioned by knowledge and vision of things as they really are; dispassion is conditioned by disenchantment; liberation is conditioned by dispassion; the knowledge of the destruction of the taints is conditioned by liberation.

‘‘Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, uparipabbate thullaphusitake deve vassante taṃ udakaṃ yathāninnaṃ pavattamānaṃ pabbatakandarapadarasākhā paripūreti. Pabbatakandarapadarasākhāparipūrā kusobbhe [kussubbhe (sī. syā. kaṃ.), kusubbhe (pī.) ṇvādi 129 suttaṃ oloketabbaṃ] paripūrenti. Kusobbhā paripūrā mahāsobbhe paripūrenti. Mahāsobbhā paripūrā kunnadiyo paripūrenti. Kunnadiyo paripūrā mahānadiyo paripūrenti. Mahānadiyo paripūrā mahāsamuddaṃ paripūrenti.

Just as, monks, when a heavy shower of rain is falling on a mountain top, the water flowing down along the slope fills the mountain clefts, fissures, and rivulets. When the mountain clefts, fissures, and rivulets are full, they fill the little pools. When the little pools are full, they fill the great lakes. When the great lakes are full, they fill the small rivers. When the small rivers are full, they fill the great rivers. When the great rivers are full, they fill the great ocean.

‘‘Evameva kho, bhikkhave, avijjūpanisā saṅkhārā, saṅkhārūpanisaṃ viññāṇaṃ, viññāṇūpanisaṃ nāmarūpaṃ, nāmarūpūpanisaṃ saḷāyatanaṃ, saḷāyatanūpaniso phasso, phassūpanisā vedanā, vedanūpanisā taṇhā, taṇhūpanisaṃ upādānaṃ, upādānūpaniso bhavo, bhavūpanisā jāti, jātūpanisaṃ dukkhaṃ, dukkhūpanisā saddhā, saddhūpanisaṃ pāmojjaṃ, pāmojjūpanisā pīti, pītūpanisā passaddhi, passaddhūpanisaṃ sukhaṃ, sukhūpaniso samādhi, samādhūpanisaṃ yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ, yathābhūtañāṇadassanūpanisā nibbidā, nibbidūpaniso virāgo, virāgūpanisā vimutti, vimuttūpanisaṃ khayeñāṇa’’nti. Tatiyaṃ.

Just so, monks, volitional formations are conditioned by ignorance; consciousness is conditioned by volitional formations; name-and-form is conditioned by consciousness; the six sense bases are conditioned by name-and-form; contact is conditioned by the six sense bases; feeling is conditioned by contact; craving is conditioned by feeling; clinging is conditioned by craving; existence is conditioned by clinging; birth is conditioned by existence; suffering is conditioned by birth; confidence is conditioned by suffering; gladness is conditioned by confidence; rapture is conditioned by gladness; tranquility is conditioned by rapture; happiness is conditioned by tranquility; samādhi is conditioned by happiness; knowledge and vision of things as they really are is conditioned by samādhi; disenchantment is conditioned by knowledge and vision of things as they really are; dispassion is conditioned by disenchantment; liberation is conditioned by dispassion; the knowledge of the destruction of the taints is conditioned by liberation.” This is the third.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S ii 29 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.61]], [[AN3.95]], [[AN10.62]], [[AN4.147]], [[SN55.38]], [[MN2]], [[ITI102]], [[SN22.101]], [[SN56.25]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.23]]
> ◄  [[sn12.22-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.24-deepseek-pali]] ►
