---
sutta_code: "SN12.39"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyacetanāsutta "
  - "Volition (2)"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.39]]
> ◄  [[sn12.38-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.40-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 12.39 Dutiyacetanāsuttaṃ

## SN 12.39 The Second Discourse on Volition (Cetanā)

39. Sāvatthiyaṃ viharati…pe… ‘‘yañca, bhikkhave, ceteti yañca pakappeti yañca anuseti, ārammaṇametaṃ hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe sati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa hoti. Tasmiṃ patiṭṭhite viññāṇe virūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti. Nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ; saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso; phassapaccayā vedanā…pe… taṇhā… upādānaṃ… bhavo… jāti… jarāmaraṇaṃ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti’’.

39.At Savatthi. (bhikkhus, the Blessed One said this): “Monks, whatever one intends, whatever one plans, and whatever one has an underlying tendency for, this becomes an object for the establishment of consciousness. When there is an object, there is a footing for consciousness. When consciousness is established and has grown, there is the descent of name-and-form. With name-and-form as condition, the six sense bases; with the six sense bases as condition, contact; with contact as condition, feeling… craving… clinging… existence… birth… aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair come to be. Thus is the origin of this entire mass of suffering.”

‘‘No ce, bhikkhave, ceteti no ce pakappeti, atha ce anuseti, ārammaṇametaṃ hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe sati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa hoti. Tasmiṃ patiṭṭhite viññāṇe virūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti. Nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ…pe… evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

“Monks, if one does not intend or plan, yet still has an underlying tendency, this becomes an object for the establishment of consciousness. When there is an object, there is a footing for consciousness. When consciousness is established and has grown, there is the descent of name-and-form. With name-and-form as condition, the six sense bases… Thus is the origin of this entire mass of suffering.

‘‘Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, no ceva ceteti no ca pakappeti no ca anuseti, ārammaṇametaṃ na hoti viññāṇassa ṭhitiyā. Ārammaṇe asati patiṭṭhā viññāṇassa na hoti. Tadappatiṭṭhite viññāṇe avirūḷhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti na hoti. Nāmarūpanirodhā saḷāyatananirodho…pe… evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī’’ti. Navamaṃ.

“Monks, when one neither intends, nor plans, nor has an underlying tendency, this is not an object for the establishment of consciousness. When there is no object, there is no footing for consciousness. When consciousness is unestablished and has not grown, there is no descent of name-and-form. With the cessation of name-and-form, there is the cessation of the six sense bases… Thus is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering.” This is the ninth.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.39-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA360]] | S ii 66 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA360]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.64]], [[SN22.53]], [[SN22.54]], [[SN4:23AND22:87AND12.12]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.39]]
> ◄  [[sn12.38-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn12.40-deepseek-pali]] ►
