---
sutta_code: "SN40.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyajhanapañhāsutta "
  - "The Second jhāna"
sutta-version: "Deep Seek"
language: "English - Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN40]]  / 🌐 [[SN40.2]]
> ◄  [[sn40.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn40.3-deepseek-pali]] ►

# SN 40.2 Dutiyajhānapañhāsuttaṃ

## SN 40.2 "‘The second jhāna, the second jhāna’ is spoken of. What now is the second jhāna? It occurred to me, friend: ‘Here, a bhikkhu, with the subsiding of thought and examination, enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal assurance and unification of mind, is without thought and examination, and has rapture and happiness born of samādhi. This is called the second jhāna.’ So, friend, with the subsiding of thought and examination, I entered and dwelled in the second jhāna, which has internal assurance and unification of mind, is without thought and examination, and has rapture and happiness born of samādhi. While I was dwelling in this abiding, friend, perceptions and attention accompanied by thought arose.

333. ‘‘‘Dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ, dutiyaṃ jhāna’nti vuccati. Katamaṃ nu kho dutiyaṃ jhānanti? Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, etadahosi – ‘idha bhikkhu vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati. Idaṃ vuccati dutiyaṃ jhāna’nti. So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharāmi. Tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, iminā vihārena viharato vitakkasahagatā saññāmanasikārā samudācaranti.

333."Then, friend, the Blessed One approached me by psychic power and said: ‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! Do not be negligent regarding the second jhāna, brahmin. Settle your mind in the second jhāna, unify your mind in the second jhāna, concentrate your mind in the second jhāna.’ So, friend, at another time, with the subsiding of thought and examination, having internal assurance and unification of mind, without thought, without examination, I entered and dwelled in the second jhāna, which has rapture and happiness born of samādhi. Truly, friend, if anyone should rightly say: ‘A disciple has attained great direct knowledge through the Teacher’s support,’ it is of me that one should rightly say: ‘A disciple has attained great direct knowledge through the Teacher’s support.’" The second.

‘‘Atha kho maṃ, āvuso, bhagavā iddhiyā upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca – ‘moggallāna, moggallāna! Mā, brāhmaṇa, dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ pamādo, dutiye jhāne cittaṃ saṇṭhapehi, dutiye jhāne cittaṃ ekodiṃ karohi, dutiye jhāne cittaṃ samādahā’ti. So khvāhaṃ, āvuso, aparena samayena vitakkavicārānaṃ vūpasamā ajjhattaṃ sampasādanaṃ cetaso ekodibhāvaṃ avitakkaṃ avicāraṃ samādhijaṃ pītisukhaṃ dutiyaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja vihāsiṃ. Yañhi taṃ, āvuso, sammā vadamāno vadeyya – ‘satthārānuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṃ patto’ti, mamaṃ taṃ sammā vadamāno vadeyya – ‘satthārānuggahito sāvako mahābhiññataṃ patto’’’ti. Dutiyaṃ.

"Then, friend, the Blessed One approached me by psychic power and said: ‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! Do not be negligent regarding the second jhāna, brahmin. Settle your mind in the second jhāna, unify your mind in the second jhāna, concentrate your mind in the second jhāna.’ So, friend, at another time, with the stilling of thought and examination, having internal confidence and unification of mind, without thought, without examination, I entered and dwelled in the second jhāna, which has rapture and happiness born of samādhi. Truly, friend, if anyone should rightly say: ‘A disciple has attained great direct knowledge through the Teacher’s help,’ it is of me that one should rightly say: ‘A disciple has attained great direct knowledge through the Teacher’s help.’" The second.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn40.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iv 263 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN40]]  / 🌐 [[SN40.2]]
> ◄  [[sn40.1-deepseek-pali]] 📜  [[sn40.3-deepseek-pali]] ►
