---

nikaya:

- "SN"

- "Saṃyutta Nikāya"

contribution:

- index

---

# 📒 SN - Saṁyutta Nikāya

> [!TIP]- Samyuttas
>
> | Verses | Causation | Aggregates | Sense Bases | Great Book |
> | ---------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |
> | [[SN1-11]] | [[SN12-21]] | [[SN22-34]] | [[SN35-44]] | [[SN45-56]] |
> 
> | [[SN12]] | [[SN13]] | [[SN14]] | [[SN15]] | [[SN16]]  |  
> | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | -------- |
> |[[SN17]] | [[SN18]] | [[SN19]] | [[SN20]] | [[SN21]] |

## SN12-21 - Causation - Nidānavagga

### 📂 SN16 - Kassapasaṁyutta - Kassapa

> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.1]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.1-) - Santuṭṭhasutta – Content
> Kassapa is content with robes, alms-food, lodging, and medicines.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.2]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.2-) - Anottappīsutta – Imprudent
> Sāriputta approaches Kassapa and asks how it is that only someone who is keen and conscientious can realize freedom.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.3]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.3-) - Candūpamāsutta – Like the Moon
> Kassapa is content with robes, alms-food, lodging, and medicines.  While some bhikkhus approach families in the hope of receiving fine gifts or respect


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.4]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.4-) - Kulūpakasutta – Visiting Families
> Kassapa is content with robes, alms-food, lodging, and medicines.  While some bhikkhus approach families in the hope of receiving fine gifts or respect


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.5]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.5-) - Jiṇṇasutta – Old Age
> Ven. Maha Kassapa explains why he chooses to continue meditating in the forest wilderness even though he has long since attained arahantship


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.6]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.6-) - Ovādasutta – Advice
> The Buddha  invites Kassapa to teach the bhikkhus, but he is reluctant, saying that the bhikkhus have become stubborn and their good qualities are declining


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.7]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.7-) - Dutiyaovādasutta – Advice (2nd)
> The Buddha  invites Kassapa to teach the bhikkhus, but he is reluctant, saying that the bhikkhus have become stubborn and their good qualities are declining


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.8]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.8-) - Tatiyaovādasutta – Advice (3rd)
> Ven. Maha Kassapa explains why he chooses to continue meditating in the forest wilderness even though he has long since attained arahantship


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.9]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.9-) - Jhānābhiññasutta – Absorptions and Insights
> When Kassapa is persuaded by āNanda to go with him to teach the nuns, the nun thullatissā compares him unfavorably to āNanda, prompting Kassapa to issue a warning and make a bold claim of his spiritual mastery. This discourse appears to be set after the Buddha ’s passing.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.10]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.10-) - Upassayasutta – The Nuns’ Quarters
> When Kassapa is persuaded by āNanda to go with him to teach the nuns, the nun thullatissā compares him unfavorably to āNanda, prompting Kassapa to issue a warning and make a bold claim of his spiritual mastery. This discourse appears to be set after the Buddha ’s passing.


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.11]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.11-) - Cīvarasutta – Robes
> When several of āNanda’s students disrobe, Kassapa admonishes him, calling him “boy”. The nun thullanandā hears of this and criticizes Kassapa, claiming he formerly followed another teacher. But Kassapa refutes this, and gives an account of his going forth and first encounter with the Buddha .


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.12]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.12-) - Paraṁmaraṇasutta – The Realized One After Death
> Sāriputta asks Kassapa about whether a realized one survives death


> [!example]- 🌐[[SN16.13]] - 📜[Available texts](obsidian://search?query=file:sn16.13-) - Saddhammappatirūpakasutta – The Counterfeit of the True Dhamma
> Kassapa asks the Buddha  why there are now more rules but fewer awakened bhikkhus. The Buddha  replies that it is due to the arising of the counterfeit dhamma, giving five factors that lead to decline
