---
sutta_code: "SN51.18"
sutta_title:
  - "Bhikkhusutta "
  - "A Bhikkhu"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.18]]
> ◄  [[sn51.17-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn51.19-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 51. Iddhipādasaṁyutta: On the Bases of Psychic Power

### II. Shaking the Stilt Longhouse — SN51.18: A bhikkhu
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power, a bhikkhu realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

2What four? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm … energy … mental development … inquiry, and active effort.

By developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, a bhikkhu realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.”

1"Catunnaṁ, bhikkhave, iddhipādānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā bhikkhu āsavānaṁ khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihārati.

2Katamesaṁ catunnaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu chandasamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṁ iddhi pāda ṁ bhāveti, vīriyasamādhi … pe … cittasamādhi … vīmaṁsāsamādhippadhānasaṅkhārasamannāgataṁ iddhi pāda ṁ bhāveti.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, catunnaṁ iddhipādānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā bhikkhu āsavānaṁ khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāratī"ti.

Aṭṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 275 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.18]]
> ◄  [[sn51.17-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn51.19-pali-sc]] ►
