---
sutta_code: "SN48.64"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.64]]
> ◄  [[sn48.63-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.65-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### VII. Leading to Awakening — SN48.64: Ending of Defilements
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to the ending of defilements. What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to the ending of defilements.”

“bhikkhus, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies, completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements. What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies, completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattanti. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṁ … pe … paññindriyaṁ – imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattantīti.

2Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni saṁyojanappahānāya saṁvattanti, anusayasamugghātāya saṁvattanti, addhānapariññāya saṁvattanti, āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattanti. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṁ … pe … paññindriyaṁ – imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyāni bhāvitāni bahulīkatāni saṁyojanappahānāya saṁvattanti, anusayasamugghātāya saṁvattanti, addhānapariññāya saṁvattanti, āsavānaṁ khayāya saṁvattantī"ti.

Catutthaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.64-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.64]]
> ◄  [[sn48.63-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.65-pali-sc]] ►
