---
sutta_code: "SN48.27"
sutta_title:
  - "Arahantasutta "
  - "Arahant"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.27]]
> ◄  [[sn48.26-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.28-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### III. The Six Faculties — SN48.27: A Perfected One
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. A bhikkhu comes to be freed by not grasping after truly understanding these six faculties’ origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.

Such a bhikkhu is called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetters of rebirth, and is rightly freed through enlightenment.”

1"Chayimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni cha? Cakkhundriyaṁ, sotindriyaṁ, ghānindriyaṁ, jivhindriyaṁ, kāyindriyaṁ, manindriyaṁ.

Yato kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu imesaṁ channaṁ indriyānaṁ samudayañca atthaṅgamañca assādañca ādīnavañca nissaraṇañca yathābhūtaṁ viditvā anupādāvimutto hoti – ayaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, ‘bhikkhu arahaṁ khīṇāsavo vusitavā katakaraṇīyo ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parikkhīṇabhavasaṁyojano sammadaññāvimutto’"ti.

Sattamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.27-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 205 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.27]]
> ◄  [[sn48.26-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.28-pali-sc]] ►
