---
sutta_code: "SN48.20"
sutta_title:
  - "Āsavakkhayasutta "
  - "Destruction of the Taints"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.20]]
> ◄  [[sn48.19-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.21-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### II. Weaker — SN48.20: The Ending of Defilements
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five faculties.

It’s because of developing and cultivating these five faculties that a bhikkhu realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṁ … pe … paññindriyaṁ – imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyāni.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ indriyānaṁ bhāvitattā bahulīkatattā bhikkhu āsavānaṁ khayā anāsavaṁ cetovimuttiṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāratī"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Mudutaravaggo dutiyo.

2Paṭilābho tayo saṅkhittā,  
vitthārā apare tayo;  
Paṭipanno ca sampanno,  
dasamaṁ āsavakkhayanti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.20-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA649]] | S v 203 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA649]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.20]]
> ◄  [[sn48.19-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.21-pali-sc]] ►
