---
sutta_code: "SN48.39"
sutta_title:
  - "Kaṭṭhopamasutta "
  - "The Simile of the Fire-Sticks"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.39]]
> ◄  [[sn48.38-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.40-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### IV. The leasure Faculty — SN48.39: The Simile of the Fire Sticks
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

The faculty of pleasure arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. When in a state of pleasure, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of pleasure.’ With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as pleasant, you understand that the corresponding faculty of pleasure ceases and stops.

2The faculty of pain arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful. When in a state of pain, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of pain.’ With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as painful, you understand that the corresponding faculty of pain ceases and stops.

3The faculty of happiness arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as happiness. When in a state of happiness, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of happiness.’ With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as happiness, you understand that the corresponding faculty of happiness ceases and stops.

4The faculty of sadness arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as sadness. When in a state of sadness, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of sadness.’ With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as sadness, you understand that the corresponding faculty of sadness ceases and stops.

5The faculty of equanimity arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as equanimous. When in a state of equanimity, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of equanimity.’ With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as equanimous, you understand that the corresponding faculty of equanimity ceases and stops.

6When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any corresponding heat ceases and stops.

In the same way, the faculty of pleasure arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. When in a state of pleasure, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of pleasure.’ With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as pleasant, you understand that the corresponding faculty of pleasure ceases and stops.

7The faculty of pain … happiness … sadness … equanimity arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as equanimous. When in a state of equanimity, you understand: ‘I’m in a state of equanimity.’ With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as equanimous, you understand that the corresponding faculty of equanimity ceases and stops.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Sukhindriyaṁ, dukkhindriyaṁ, somanassindriyaṁ, domanassindriyaṁ, upekkhindriyaṁ.

Sukhavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati sukhindriyaṁ. So sukhitova samāno ‘sukhitosmī’ti pajānāti. Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘Yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ sukhavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppannaṁ sukhindriyaṁ taṁ nirujjhati, taṁ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

2Dukkhavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhindriyaṁ. So dukkhitova samāno ‘dukkhitosmī’ti pajānāti. Tasseva dukkhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘Yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ dukkhavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppannaṁ dukkhindriyaṁ taṁ nirujjhati, taṁ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

3Somanassavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati somanassindriyaṁ. So sumanova samāno ‘sumanosmī’ti pajānāti. Tasseva somanassavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘Yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ somanassavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppannaṁ somanassindriyaṁ taṁ nirujjhati, taṁ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

4Domanassavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati domanassindriyaṁ. So dummanova samāno ‘dummanosmī’ti pajānāti. Tasseva domanassavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘Yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ domanassavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppannaṁ domanassindriyaṁ taṁ nirujjhati, taṁ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

5Upekkhāvedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati upekkhindriyaṁ. So upekkhakova samāno ‘upekkhakosmī’ti pajānāti. Tasseva upekkhāvedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘Yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ upekkhāvedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppannaṁ upekkhindriyaṁ taṁ nirujjhati, taṁ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

6Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, dvinnaṁ kaṭṭhānaṁ saṅghaṭṭanasamodhānā usmā jāyati, tejo abhinibbattati; tesaṁyeva kaṭṭhānaṁ nānābhāvāvinikkhepā yā tajjā usmā sā nirujjhati sā vūpasammati;

evameva kho, bhikkhave, sukhavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati sukhindriyaṁ. So sukhitova samāno ‘sukhitosmī’ti pajānāti. Tasseva sukhavedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘Yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ sukhavedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati sukhindriyaṁ taṁ nirujjhati, taṁ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti.

7Dukkhavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca … pe … somanassavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca … pe … domanassavedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca … pe … upekkhāvedaniyaṁ, bhikkhave, phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati upekkhindriyaṁ. So upekkhakova samāno ‘upekkhakosmī’ti pajānāti. Tasseva upekkhāvedaniyassa phassassa nirodhā ‘Yaṁ tajjaṁ vedayitaṁ upekkhāvedaniyaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati upekkhindriyaṁ taṁ nirujjhati, taṁ vūpasammatī’ti pajānāti".

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.39-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 211 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.39]]
> ◄  [[sn48.38-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.40-pali-sc]] ►
