---
sutta_code: "SN48.36"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamavibhaṅgasutta "
  - "Analysis (1)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.36]]
> ◄  [[sn48.35-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.37-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### IV. The leasure Faculty — SN48.36: Analysis (1st)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

2And what is the faculty of pleasure? Physical enjoyment, physical pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that’s born from physical contact. This is called the faculty of pleasure.

3And what is the faculty of pain? Physical pain, physical displeasure, the painful, unpleasant feeling that’s born from physical contact. This is called the faculty of pain.

4And what is the faculty of happiness? Mental enjoyment, mental pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that’s born from mind contact. This is called the faculty of happiness.

5And what is the faculty of sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the painful, unpleasant feeling that’s born from mind contact. This is called the faculty of sadness.

6And what is the faculty of equanimity? Neither pleasant nor unpleasant feeling, whether physical or mental. This is the faculty of equanimity.

These are the five faculties.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Sukhindriyaṁ, dukkhindriyaṁ, somanassindriyaṁ, domanassindriyaṁ, upekkhindriyaṁ.

2Katamañca, bhikkhave, sukhindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, kāyikaṁ sukhaṁ, kāyikaṁ sātaṁ, kāyasamphassajaṁ sukhaṁ sātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, sukhindriyaṁ.

3Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, kāyikaṁ dukkhaṁ, kāyikaṁ asātaṁ, kāyasamphassajaṁ dukkhaṁ asātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhindriyaṁ.

4Katamañca, bhikkhave, somanassindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, cetasikaṁ sukhaṁ, cetasikaṁ sātaṁ, manosamphassajaṁ sukhaṁ sātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, somanassindriyaṁ.

5Katamañca, bhikkhave, domanassindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, cetasikaṁ dukkhaṁ, cetasikaṁ asātaṁ, manosamphassajaṁ dukkhaṁ asātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, domanassindriyaṁ.

6Katamañca, bhikkhave, upekkhindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, kāyikaṁ vā cetasikaṁ vā nevasātaṁ nāsātaṁ vedayitaṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, upekkhindriyaṁ.

Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyānī"ti.

Chaṭṭhaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.36-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA485]] | S v 209 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA485]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.36]]
> ◄  [[sn48.35-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.37-pali-sc]] ►
