---
sutta_code: "SN48.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭilābhasutta "
  - "Obtainment"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.11]]
> ◄  [[sn48.10-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.12-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### II. Weaker — SN48.11: Gain
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the faculty of faith? It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ This is called the faculty of faith.

2And what is the faculty of energy? The energy that’s gained in connection with the four right efforts. This is called the faculty of energy.

3And what is the faculty of mindfulness? The mindfulness that’s gained in connection with the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. This is called the faculty of mindfulness.

4And what is the faculty of immersion? It’s when a noble disciple, relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind. This is called the faculty of immersion.

5And what is the faculty of wisdom? It’s when a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is called the faculty of wisdom.

These are the five faculties.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṁ … pe … paññindriyaṁ … pe … .

Katamañca, bhikkhave, saddhindriyaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako saddho hoti, saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṁ: ‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṁ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavā’ti – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, saddhindriyaṁ.

2Katamañca, bhikkhave, vīriyindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, cattāro sammappadhāne ārabbha vīriyaṁ paṭilabhati – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, vīriyindriyaṁ.

3Katamañca, bhikkhave, satindriyaṁ? Yaṁ kho, bhikkhave, cattāro satipaṭṭhāne ārabbha satiṁ paṭilabhati – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, satindriyaṁ.

4Katamañca, bhikkhave, samādhindriyaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako vossaggārammaṇaṁ karitvā labhati samādhiṁ, labhati cittassa ekaggataṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, samādhindriyaṁ.

5Katamañca, bhikkhave, paññindriyaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, paññindriyaṁ.

Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyānī"ti.

Paṭhamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 199 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN8.30.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.11]]
> ◄  [[sn48.10-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.12-pali-sc]] ►
