---
sutta_code: "SN48.169"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.169]]
> ◄  [[sn48.137-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### XV. Another Chapter on Floods — SN48.169-178: Another Chapter on Floods
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five higher fetters.

The five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters. What five? It’s when a bhikkhu develops the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

These five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.”

To be expanded as in SN45.169-178, with the above as the final discourse, removal of greed version.


Floods, bonds, grasping,  
ties, and underlying tendencies,  
kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,  
aggregates, and fetters high and low.

“Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, uddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni. Katamāni pañca? Rūparāgo, arūparāgo, māno, uddhaccaṁ, avijjā — imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcuddhambhāgiyāni saṁyojanāni.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ uddhambhāgiyānaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya pañcindriyāni bhāvetabbāni. Katamāni pañca? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu saddhindriyaṁ bhāveti rāgavinayapariyosānaṁ dosavinayapariyosānaṁ mohavinayapariyosānaṁ. Vīriyindriyaṁ … pe … satindriyaṁ … samādhindriyaṁ … paññindriyaṁ bhāveti rāgavinayapariyosānaṁ dosavinayapariyosānaṁ mohavinayapariyosānaṁ.

Imesaṁ kho, bhikkhave, pañcannaṁ uddhambhāgiyānaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya imāni pañcindriyāni bhāvetabbānī”ti.

Oghavaggo sattarasamo.

Tassuddānaṁ


Ogho yogo upādānaṁ,  
ganthā anusayena ca;  
Kāmaguṇā nīvaraṇā,  
khandhā oruddhambhāgiyāti.

Indriyasaṁyuttaṁ catutthaṁ.

[[sn48.137-168#content]][[sn49#content]]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.169-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.169]]
> ◄  [[sn48.137-pali-sc]] 📜  [[]] ►
