---
sutta_code: "SN48.70"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.70]]
> ◄  [[sn48.69-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.71-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### VII. Leading to Awakening — SN48.70: A Tree (4th)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, of all the trees belonging to the phoenixes, the red silk-cotton tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened. And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened. Of all the trees belonging to the phoenixes, the red silk-cotton tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.”

1"Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci supaṇṇānaṁ rukkhā, kūṭasimbalī tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – bodhāya. Katame ca, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyā dhammā? Saddhindriyaṁ, bhikkhave, bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati … pe … paññindriyaṁ bodhipakkhiyo dhammo, taṁ bodhāya saṁvattati. Seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ye keci supaṇṇānaṁ rukkhā, kūṭasimbalī tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati; evameva kho, bhikkhave, ye keci bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, paññindriyaṁ tesaṁ aggamakkhāyati, yadidaṁ – bodhāyā"ti.

Dasamaṁ.  
Bodhipakkhiyavaggo sattamo.

2Saṁyojanā anusayā,  
pariññā āsavakkhayā;  
Dve phalā caturo rukkhā,  
vaggo tena pavuccatīti.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.70-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.70]]
> ◄  [[sn48.69-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.71-pali-sc]] ►
