---
sutta_code: "SN48.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamavibhaṅgasutta "
  - "Analysis (1)"
sutta-version: "SC - Sutta Central"
language: "Pali"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.9]]
> ◄  [[sn48.8-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.10-pali-sc]] ►

## Saṁyutta Nikāya — The Linked Discourses

## 48. Indriyasaṁyutta: On the Faculties

### I. Plain Version — SN48.9: Analysis (1st)
#### B. Sujato


1“bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

2And what is the faculty of faith? It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ This is called the faculty of faith.

3And what is the faculty of energy? It’s when a bhikkhu lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the faculty of energy.

4And what is the faculty of mindfulness? It’s when a noble disciple is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago. This is called the faculty of mindfulness.

5And what is the faculty of immersion? It’s when a noble disciple, relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind. This is called the faculty of immersion.

6And what is the faculty of wisdom? It’s when a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is called the faculty of wisdom.

These are the five faculties.”

1"Pañcimāni, bhikkhave, indriyāni. Katamāni pañca? Saddhindriyaṁ … pe … paññindriyaṁ.

Katamañca, bhikkhave, saddhindriyaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako saddho hoti, saddahati tathāgatassa bodhiṁ: ‘itipi so bhagavā arahaṁ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavā’ti – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, saddhindriyaṁ.

2Katamañca, bhikkhave, vīriyindriyaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako āraddhavīriyo vihārati akusalānaṁ dhammānaṁ pahānāya, kusalānaṁ dhammānaṁ upasampadāya, thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, vīriyindriyaṁ.

3Katamañca, bhikkhave, satindriyaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako satimā hoti paramena satinepakkena samannāgato cirakatampi cirabhāsitampi saritā anussaritā – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, satindriyaṁ.

4Katamañca, bhikkhave, samādhindriyaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako vossaggārammaṇaṁ karitvā labhati samādhiṁ, labhati cittassa ekaggataṁ – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, samādhindriyaṁ.

5Katamañca, bhikkhave, paññindriyaṁ? Idha, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya, sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā – idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, paññindriyaṁ.

Imāni kho, bhikkhave, pañcindriyānī"ti.

Navamaṁ.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA647]] | S v 196 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA647]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN8.30.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.9]]
> ◄  [[sn48.8-pali-sc]] 📜  [[sn48.10-pali-sc]] ►
